Good afternoon. Live from New York City
for our audience worldwide. Bloomberg's
The Fed Decides starts right now.
This is a special edition of Bloomberg
Surveillance with Jonathan Ferro, Lisa
Abramowicz, and Tom Keene. Bloomberg
Surveillance, The Fed Decides.
Live on Bloomberg TV and radio counting
down to another Fed rate decision and
Chair Powell news conference. Tom Keene
here, Lisa Abramowicz, as we count you
down to I think one of the most exciting
Fed meetings we have ever seen given the
fact this might be the last rate cut
with a Fed led by Chair Powell.
>> state with great force it will not be a
snooze fest. I think we're there. Anna
Wong within the last hour, my latest
favorite forward-looking indicator
showing renewed disinflation. That's
behind the support of people looking for
not only one rate cut, but many rate
cuts to come. So, let's have a sound
effect for every time someone says
hawkish cut because that's essentially
what people are expecting. That yes,
they will cut rates for a total of 175
basis points of decline since last
September, but it will come with an
indication that probably won't be that
many more ahead. It's it's wide open. I
mean, we're going to have a somebody
said it's like a TV soap opera. That's
what this is. You're tuning in. You're
at 1:30 for the 2:00 p.m.
Days of Our Lives, I guess, for the Fed.
Within all that is we grab onto the
latest statistics. The employment for
employment cost index, the ECI today
really did indicate a further
disinflation,
which gets you the confidence to get out
to next year. Well, the soap opera of
markets is a real in direction right
now, at least when it comes to equities.
Really fluctuating between gains and
losses as people try to get a sense of
exactly what's going forward. Looking at
S&P 500, it's almost exactly where it
was on October 29th during the Fed's
last meeting. Euro dollar also pretty
much almost exactly where it was at 116.
Gold, however, is 7% higher, stronger
than it was back on October 29th. The
twos, tens, and 30s space is where the
action's at. The twos has been
locked in at that 3.6%
rate, just a little off that 3.59%.
The 10-year, though, markedly higher. It
is off today, yields lower, but watch
that 10-year as globally you've got that
bond sell-off. You do and the spread
market is worth watching. The
sophisticated pros like Bob Michael,
they're not just looking at one
statistic. They're looking at all sorts
of fancy spreads, particularly out the
curve to get indications.
>> Yeah, and how much the yield curve has
steepened around the world. We're going
to be speaking just shortly with JP
Morgan's Bob Michael. We're so glad to
have him, as well as Kathy Jones of
Charles Schwab and SocGen's Subadra
Rajappa. They'll be taking us up to that
Fed rate decision at 2:00 p.m. Eastern,
then immediate reaction from Jim Bianco
of Bianco Research, Diane Swonk of KPMG,
and Deutsche Bank's Matthew Luzzetti,
and finally breaking down Chair Powell's
news conference with Stephanie Roth of
Wolfe Research, Bank of America's Aditya
Bhave, and BlackRock's Jeff Rosenberg.
So glad to say that joining us here in
studio, as he does, is Bob Michael of JP
Morgan, who helps us lead off our
coverage of the Fed meetings. How
important is this one in the pantheon of
Fed meetings? I'm with you on this. This
is going to be an extraordinary meeting.
There's so much that's going to go on. I
think everyone is expecting the 25 basis
point rate cut. It would be a stunner if
it didn't happen. The Fed would have
prepared us by now if it wasn't going to
happen, but all the action is going to
be with the sense. How many is he going
to have? Will be limited to two, or
could there be as many as five? I think
that would be extraordinary, and then we
have to watch the statement after the
FOMC meeting to see how they tilt that.
Will it be a little hawkish or not? And
then the press conference. There's a lot
going on. I agree on the specificity of
the dissent will be fascinating to
dissect. Michael Feroli at JP Morgan's
way too young to remember Wayne Angell
and some of the fractious moments in the
'90s and even back to the 1980s. Bruce
Kasman maybe can understand it because
he's ancient like me. And the bottom
line is is this new territory, or is
there an analog Bob Michael can work off
of getting to this meeting and beyond?
Um, first of all, Feroli does have some
gray hair, so he's not as young as we
all think. He's been around the block.
Um,
I think we're entering new territory. I
think most everyone has worked through
the Greenspan era where Alan Greenspan
made sure to corral the Fed and come out
with a unanimous decision. And and the
belief was, if you've got something to
say, say it in the meeting. See if you
can convince other people. If you can't,
then get behind the decision that's been
made, and let's make it work. We can
always come back and adjust. I think a
lot of dissent is a seismic shift.
>> I had a luxury this week of a
spectacular room at the Global
Interdependence Center conference on
stage with Shirakawa, Frankel, and
Portgai of Argentina, as well. And one
of the themes there is the risk, with
all the politics behind this meeting, of
being unanchored. Do you see any
indications among your professionals
that the markets are becoming
unanchored?
I don't think we're there yet. I hope we
don't get there. I do believe this is a
Fed that goes in, it analyzes the data.
Yes, there's been a shortage of data, so
they've got to try and fill in where
there are gaps. We'll get some with the
employment data next week. It'll be a
little bit later
than when they normally make decisions,
but I I do feel they are trying to do
the right thing. Right. And and by the
way, if they do cut rates 25 basis
points, you're down to 3 and 5/8%.
You're you're not at sub-3%. Did you see
what a money market fund is at? Yeah. I
had no idea. I'm in the triple over saw
cash. I was popping 8%. It's gone. Which
is the reason why some people think that
you should get more of a bid into
longer-term Treasuries. I know that Bob
Michael is one of those who thinks that
if the Fed does cut and indicates
further cuts, you want to buy the
sell-off in long-term yields. I guess to
to Tom's point, to build on that, do you
see any indication that the sell-off
globally in bonds is a result of
unwarranted inflation expectations, or
is this something else that is more of
an anomaly that gives you a buying
opportunity? So, I'll tip my hand. We
were in buying this morning when we
walked in. So, we like yields at these
levels. We thought that the market had
backed up too far, and it made sense for
us to stick our toe in. We do see a lot
of moderation in the labor market. We do
see inflation coming down a bit. That
will probably be in the summary of
economic projections. We should see them
drop
a tenth for each of the outgoing years.
And it it just feels to us that the
market suddenly woke up to, "Oh my god,
there could be dissent. They may not go
every meeting." And there was selling,
and the selling looked well overdone to
us.
>> Last time you were here, you said that
this is a Fed Chair Jay Powell who has
lost control over the FOMC. And we seem
to see that with the dissent that it
came out during that meeting. If there
are four or five dissents, can you say
that this is a Fed Chair Jay Powell that
is leaving a legacy of a Fed Chair that
does not control the the FOMC in the
same kind of way, that you cannot give
forward guidance with this type of
fissure that we're likely to see
persist? So, there's no wrong model, and
the Bank of England operates with, "If
you disagree, vote that way, and we'll
go with the majority." I happen to like
everyone say what they have to say
during the meeting. We've got to make a
decision. Once the decision's been made,
accept that you were unable to convince
people, recognize that the majority
wants to go in this direction, and get
behind it. So, I'm more in favor. But if
if this is a shift, I think that's going
to be the future. What does that say
about a Kevin Hassett Fed, or any kind
of new leadership that comes in under
President Trump? We know that Fed Chair
Jay Powell will be replaced. Does that
mean that that person is less important
if the committee is already fractured
and not willing to get behind that
person?
>> Uh, that's such a good question. I'm I'm
not a believer that this is a 100% deal
with Hassett. He's interviewing with
President Trump now, and I think
President Trump is looking at Scott
Bessent and saying, "Is this guy better
than Bessent?" And the one determining
factor will be how convincing and
persuasive will will Hassett be relative
to Bessent. Bessent has done an
excellent job getting out there with the
administration's message and calming the
markets and explaining what's going on.
I think that's something that we haven't
seen from Hassett yet. Who would replace
Bessent then at Treasury? Would it be a
building contractor in London looking
for a new building out on the river?
Well, well, well, well, why
Mr. Diamond would be available? Well,
Bessent had Well, I hope not. I think
Jamie's doing a fine job where he is.
>> Would you like some? Let's not start
Let's not start that rumor. Let's keep
Jamie where he is.
Um, I think that's the question. Why is
Bessent not taking this role? Uh,
President Trump has made it clear he
wants him in this role. If I were Scott
Bessent, I would say, "I would go to
that role as Fed Chair if I could name
my successor as Treasury Secretary with
you. We agree on someone."
>> something out of the 19th century. I I
don't know which president was before
Lincoln, but this meeting is nuts today.
>> We are in a new regime, and it does feel
like we're seeing a sea change in terms
of the Bretton Woods Accord, in terms of
the financial markets, in terms of how
the Fed operates going forward. This
idea that everyone coalesces around one
idea seems to be fading a bit as you see
more dissent. Bob Michael is sticking
with us to tell us his key question and
so much more after being in markets to
really talk about buying the dip at
least in bond prices, yields up. A real
question if other people seeing the same
thing because of what you said about the
cash holdings and how little really gets
gets yielded.
>> Biggest meeting since time began today
and you know, again, the economic data
here in 4 5 6 days. It's an eventful
December to say the least.
>> meeting since the beginning of time.
You've heard it here first. Coming up,
Kathy Jones of Charles Schwab and
Subadra Rajappa of SocGen as we count
you down to the Fed decision. This is
Bloomberg.
[Music]
The Fed needs to do more. The Fed needs
to cut rates.
>> The rate cuts are baked in. We think
they will cut. They will cut.
>> We do expect the Fed to cut. This cut is
going to happen.
>> They're going to cut. They'll try to
make it a hawkish cut.
>> I think they're going to leave it
open-ended today.
>> This should be a mixed decision.
>> we'll also see quite a few dissents.
>> Historically, dissents are really the
norm.
>> Things are confusing and you can see
that within the debate within the FOMC
itself.
>> We just don't have a real clear picture
of what's happening in the economy.
>> Inflation remains a very sizable
problem.
>> The US labor market is soft right now.
The labor market is about as clear as
mud.
>> Driving through the fog is is a good
description. It's a cyclical slowdown in
the economy.
>> And the main question is
what the market expect the Fed to do
versus what the Fed should do. The
market would be surprised by an overly
dovish message.
>> There's so much at stake going forward
with the Fed.
>> We're increasingly moving to an era
where the Fed is more divided.
>> Clear as mud. This is countdown to the
Fed decides on Bloomberg TV and radio.
I'm Lisa Abramowicz with Tom Keene as we
see in markets looking for direction
ahead of a meeting that could
potentially set a trajectory going
forward. Clear as mud time as we hear
from so many people.
>> There's so many ways to go here. I would
go with the latest economic data and
what we're going to see after the
meeting in coming days. And as Anna Wong
said
within the last hour, there's a new
disinflationary perhaps that's out
there. It's not assured, but some of the
data indicates maybe a new path to get
to a better place which means more rate
cuts down the road.
>> Bob Michael of JP Morgan still with us
and Bob, how much are you seeing any
clarity whatsoever in data that we are
getting given the all the data that we
are not receiving? Uh not too much and
to admit, uh the labor market has been
mixed. When you look at payroll data and
weekly claims, it looks a little better
than say the ADP data. Uh we talk to a
lot of companies that we invest in and
we hear the same message back. They're
still trying to figure out what the
impact of tariffs and AI will be on
their labor force and their profits. So,
they're pausing on hiring right now.
What's notable is since the last Fed
meeting, we haven't seen much change in
the S&P 500, the euro-dollar cross. We
have seen a 7% gain in the value of
gold. We haven't seen much of a change
in 10-year yields. We have seen in
2-year yields. In 10-year yields, we
have seen a market shift higher in
30-year yields as well. So, it raises
this question going forward. What does
the market see with respect to the
sell-off in bond markets that all other
asset classes are not seeing and is it a
positive sign going forward? Joining us
now is Kathy Jones of Charles Schwab.
Kathy, from your perspective, are we
looking at a new neutral rate that the
Fed is coalescing around and that they
can agree on?
Well, I presumably they're looking at 3%
as a neutral rate if I can read the the
various indicators that they provided.
And so, you know, they could get down a
couple more rate cuts and still be
arguing that they were moving towards
neutral. I think the problem is
convincing the world that that there is
a neutral rate that is can be determined
and that that they can base policy on.
I think when we look at the steepening
in the yield curve and what's happening
with longer-term rates, it reflects
uncertainty about whether the Fed's
making the right move by cutting with
inflation still elevated. It reflects
the fact that bond yields in much of the
rest of the world are starting to move
higher, especially Japan, worries about
fiscal deficits. So, that it all comes
down to is this the right move at the
right time for the Fed? I think the
market is not clear on that and they're
building in a risk premium as you go out
the curve.
>> Okay, so I know you've published your
outlook. It's 412 pages. Rip it up. It's
going to be dead at 2:15 this afternoon.
The new outlook off of this Fed meeting,
Kathy, what does it mean for investors?
Do you clip a coupon or is there a total
return opportunity in the next year?
You know, right now, most of the return
we're expecting will be from the coupon.
There may be if inflation does come
down, if the labor market continues to
to slow from here, which not 100% sure
that's going to happen, but if it does,
then there might be some capital gains,
but I think our expectation is returns
will be positive, but not as robust as
they have been in 2025.
>> Bob Michael with us, JP Morgan. Let me
go Marty Friedman on you right now. Give
us a review of how JP Morgan sees credit
quality out there. It's a K-shaped
economy, X amount of America's flat on
their backs, but I don't see defaults,
etc. within the credit market. It's
pretty good out there, right?
>> Yeah, the public credit markets look
pretty solid to us. Corporate
profitability remains in a very good
place. Businesses have been pretty good
about how they've controlled costs. A
lot of them are thinking about CapEx
next year, doing a bit of hiring. So,
we're not hearing the things from
corporate America that would
particularly get us concerned as credit
investors. Well, let's go to Lisa
Abramowicz. You're actually expert on
this. Are we are we wicked tight right
now? Where is the spread market? Right
now, it feels like that is the concern
that maybe we are too tight relative to
even some of the idiosyncratic credit
softening, but still people want the
income and it raises the question,
Subadra, to the point excuse me, Kathy,
to the point that you're making. We'll
get to you in a second, Subadra. Going
forward in terms of is there a
contradiction in the solid
creditworthiness of so many companies
and the idea that the Fed needs to cut
so much more to really support the debt
markets?
Yeah, I think that that's the tension
right now that the and the reason we
have a steeper yield curve is it's not
clear to me with financial conditions as
easy as they are
and inflation still elevated and the
economy looking fairly sturdy,
it's not clear to me that this is a
market that needs a lot more stimulus or
needs stimulus or that we're that far
from neutral that it's required at this
stage of the game, but you know, they
are very focused on the labor market.
There has been some slowing there.
There's been a little bit of easing in
wages and it seems as if the the the big
concern is the labor market that the Fed
really wants to get ahead of and it is
in contradiction to a lot of the other
signals that we're getting from the
market.
>> Bob, do you agree with that? Do you
think that there is a contradiction
here?
Um
I don't think so. I I just look at
what's happened in the last month as
normal volatility. Some markets getting
a little bit ahead of themselves. I'm
expecting bull markets into year-end. I
don't care if you're looking at
Treasuries, you're looking at credit or
you're looking at the equity market.
That's how much interest we're seeing
from our client base. Is this just a
technical issue? And I guess Kathy,
that's sort of what is part of what's
implicated here in Bob's statement that
there's so much cash. If people have $8
trillion of cash in money market funds,
there's a lot of money looking for
income. At what point does that
overwhelm some of these other concerns
and really wash out, you know, a real
sense of whether there are credit
worries, etc. Right now, companies are
doing okay and there are enough people
who want to buy.
Yeah, we're we're on board with
investment grade public market. We think
it's pretty solid. We'll look at the the
corporate profits, margins are okay. So,
we're we've been all year saying, you
know, stick with higher credit quality
or solid credit quality and don't see a
big blowout coming. I I think the bigger
concern for us, obviously, is the public
sector debt accumulating and also the
risk that the Fed is wrong about
inflation coming down further and that
it will not get to its target anytime
soon. Kathy Jones, thank you so much for
being with us. We look forward to
catching up with you after the Fed
decision in just about 7 and a half
minutes time. Joining us now is Subadra
Rajappa of SocGen. We will get to you.
Subadra, wonderful to have you in
studio. Always great to see you. How
important is this meeting going to be?
Not just with respect to whether they
cut rates and the statement of economic
projections, but setting a precedent for
a Fed Reserve and how it operates in
terms of the Fed chair and its role.
I think it's going to be very important.
I mean, I think that in some some you
know, one way to look at it is that
Chair Powell is really setting the stage
for next year.
And you know, kind of set kind of
setting the tone for what is going to
happen as far as policy is concerned. I
mean, for the most part, I think the
expectation is that it's going to be a
hawkish cut.
I think if it turns out to be somewhat
dovish, I think that will be again quite
a surprise for the for the markets. But,
you know, in some
to me, this meeting feels like a deja vu
from last year where, you know, we
coming into the end of the year,
the Fed basically guided for you know,
policy to be on hold for a good portion
of 2025. That's what we saw and that's
exactly what we're going to hear from
them for next year because they have
delivered a few preemptive rate cuts.
So, we'll have to kind of see how
you know, the data evolves from here on
and what they have to do going forward.
>> Societe Generale owns a derivative
market. You're always looking at the
cross moments as well. What's the risk
profile into this meeting?
I mean, clearly to me, the risks in an
environment where the Fed is biased to
ease is towards easing and lower
interest rates. In fact, in our year-end
forecast for 2026, I think we might be a
little bit out of consensus expecting
10-year Treasury yields to actually go
lower from here. I think there's Right.
>> Some of our counterparts who are
expecting
>> What forecast to get to 3:00 this
afternoon? I mean, is there a bet on the
market being placed right now? So, if
you look at the last few meetings, the
price action has been to kind of be
rally softer into the market and then a
little bit of a sell-off after
the meeting. But, for the most part, I
think I'm aligned with Bob in expecting
that the markets are going to be really
cautious heading into year-end. So, the
bias ultimately towards the end of the
year is going to be towards, you know,
lower yields. Bob, let's bring you back
in. You're saying there's so much cash
here, and that's part of the reason why
you think that it's not inconsistent to
see a rally, not only in rates, but also
in the credit component. Is this
liquidity going to get added to by the
Fed's balance sheet, right? Are we sort
of all careening toward a place where
the Fed has to keep adding to its
balance sheet in order for repo
liquidity, for the functioning of
markets, which only adds to the cash
searching for income? Well, let's
remember asset prices are denominated in
money, and there's a lot of money
sloshing around in the system both from
COVID era policies and laws, as well as
the QE that has now ended.
Will the Fed keep growing its balance
sheet? Absolutely. They've ended QT.
They're starting to recognize that you
talked about public sector debt. The
size of the Treasury market is a big
unwieldy beast, and you need the Fed
balance sheet in there to help stabilize
it. So, yeah, I think we're just going
to be more of the same. And let's not
forget the administration is pro-growth,
pro-business, and that means stimulus
and lower rates.
>> Subadra, if you take that backdrop that
Bob just laid out, and a lot of people
are sympathetic with, why wouldn't you
see higher inflation in consumer prices,
not just assets?
Um, you should, but I mean, the the
realized data has been somewhat on the
softer side, right? I mean, we really
didn't see the transmission of tariffs
through to good goods inflation. You're
seeing broad-based services inflation.
You're seeing a little bit of,
uh, you know, cloudiness around the
outlook for inflation. There's a good
chance that inflation could be somewhat
more harder in the first half of next
year. But, you know, for the most part,
I think that inflation expectations have
remained relatively contained, and I
think that that, uh, leads me to believe
that, you know, there's not that much of
a concern in the markets about
inflation. Very quickly here as we get
to the decision. I I look at what both
you are saying, I think of Francis
Donald today with the Bank of Montreal,
and she's like, "Okay, I parachute in.
I've I've been Rip Van Winkle, and I
come down on December 10, 2025.
I got 3 and 1/2% Atlanta GDP now,
uh, real GDP. I got nominal GDP, what,
Bob? Five-ish plus? Yeah. Five-ish plus.
I got yields backing up a little bit.
Everybody, including Lisa, has made a
big deal about, "OMG, rate cuts as we
go." And yet, yields are going up, price
down. Jim Bianco's with us later. He'll
talk about that. Tell me about the
dissents, both ways. Let me start with
you, Bob. The people like Myron saying
cut now, is it just a political mandate,
or is there a case to let's go to cut
interest rates? Well, the case would be
that the entire FOMC is still expecting
rates the neutral rate to be lower, and
the median dot is still down around 3%,
and will be there. So, you're too far
away from the median dot. And also,
there are signs that there's some slack
in the labor market. We'll see over the
next couple months.
>> cuz of time, we got to get to the
opening face-off. Just cuz of time here,
Subadra, tell me about the case to not
cut rates today, or even, dare I say, go
Kansas City and lift rates today. Well,
the economy's been extraordinarily
strong. You've seen a significant amount
of momentum going into the second half
of the year. You're going to get a lot
of fiscal stimulus next year from the
big beautiful bill. You're also going to
be seeing a lot of AI spending, uh,
coming into the corporate bond market,
and you're going to see the reopening
from the government shutdown and
consumer spending start to pick up in
the first quarter of the Well, let's be
quickly here, then. State the case for
we delay the meeting, not having an
announcement today, and wait for the
economic data four, five, six days from
now.
>> Yeah, December 17th. Delay it a week. I
think a lot of people would agree. MH in
particular has been arguing for this.
They're not going to do that, though.
Subadra Rajappa, thank you so much for
being with us.
>> Thank you. As we count down to this Fed
decision, right now we've got about 90
seconds ahead of that decision. And
right now, markets churning, a little
bit of a negative tilt to, uh, to the
S&P, to the Nasdaq in particular. Yields
lower on the front end. Watch this space
as people expect that 25 basis point
rate cut. On the long end, we've seen a
little bit of a pulling back from an
earlier sell-off with people buying the
10-year yields, including Bob Michael
who said that he was in just earlier,
4.16%.
Let's just get your view, Bob. Do you
think that you're going to get four
dissents, three dissents, or five
dissents? What's your view?
Well, exactly. Yes, that's my view.
We're We're going to get some I I think
the range is two to five. For sure, you
should get Myron on the 50 basis point
rate cut. And for sure, I think you
should get Schmedt on no rate cuts
whatsoever. It It, you know, will we see
Musselman, Collins, Goolsbee,
uh, join, uh, Schmedt? I don't know. We
have to watch. Right now, the market is
watching, and what you are seeing is a
10-year yield that finished on October
29th at 4.07%.
We're looking right now at 4.15%.
It is signifi- It is somewhat higher,
although pulling back from some of the
earlier highs. And some could argue it
hasn't risen as much as yields say in
Germany and in France. Eurodollar has
just been pegged because sort of pick
your poison. Is it the European economy
that's flagging, or the US economy with
rate cuts? We are just 2 seconds away.
Let's get to Bloomberg's Michael McKee
with that Fed rate decision.
The most divided Fed since before the
pandemic voted to lower the benchmark
rate by 25 basis points as investors
expected, but there were three dissents
for the first time since 2019.
And on the dot plot, a total of six
members of the committee suggested they
were not in favor of lowering rates.
There's also a hawkish line in the
statement. In considering the extent and
timing of additional adjustments to the
target range, bringing back language
from a year ago when they paused their
first round of rate cuts. No surprise,
Steven Myron wanted a half-point
reduction, but in something of a
surprise, Austin Goolsbee joined Jeffrey
Schmedt in dissenting for no cut at all.
Next year's dot plot suggests just one
cut coming. Seven members want no move,
however, including three who think the
rate might go up. The committee
statement says economic activity has
been expanding at a moderate pace, and
the latest forecasts show a consensus
GDP figure of 1.7% for this year. But,
in a big move up, they have revised
growth forecast for 2026 to 2.3%.
Unemployment forecast to finish this
year at 4 and 1/2% will fall back to
4.4% next year. Using identical language
from October, the statement says job
gains have slowed this year, and the
unemployment rate has edged up through
September. Nodding to the government
shutdown caused absence of data, the
statement repeats that more recent
indicators are consistent with these
developments. There's no change in the
inflation assessment. It has moved up
since earlier in the year and remains
somewhat elevated. However, it is seen
slowing markedly next year. PCE headline
from 2.9% this year to 2.4% in 2026.
And as always, they won't reach their 2%
target for 2 more years in 2028. Core
PCE will finish the year at 3%, falling
to 2 and 1/2% next year. As for the
balance sheet, the statement now says
reserve balances have declined to ample
levels. The Fed will buy shorter-term
Treasuries, mostly bills, but up to
3-year notes, as needed to maintain that
ample supply. The first operation will
be announced tomorrow with the first
purchases on, uh, Friday of
approximately $40 billion in Treasury
bills. Guys, Michael McKee, uh, stay
close as we parse through this. Right
now, what you see in markets is a
collective cheer. Perhaps this was
supposed to be a hawkish cut. The market
is taking it slightly differently. S&P,
uh, had been lower, now it is positive
by almost 2/10 of a percent. Eurodollar,
euro climbing, dollar falling on the
heels of what does seem to be like more
Fed cuts. And across the board, twos,
10s, and 30s, you are seeing a bid into
bonds with this feeling that this is a
Fed that not only is going to support
rates with further rate cuts, but also
with additional bond purchases, Tom.
>> To me, the most interesting nuance here
is the dissent of the gentleman from
Chicago. This is brilliant academics out
of Milton, Yale, and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Austin Goolsbee
is basically our technology president.
He's wired into the internet, wired into
the computers. And I'd love to know if
his dissent has to do with the vibrancy
of AI, which leads to a better
productivity, a better GDP. Let's be
careful what we do. Yeah, right now
we're looking at nine, uh, nine votes
for and three dissents. Bob Michael of
JPMorgan with us here. What's your first
reaction of this decision? Um, not as
bad as it could have been. There could
have been a lot more dissents in favor
of no uh rate cuts. When we look at
things like uh PCE,
uh we expected they would lower core PCE
by a tenth, they did that. They left the
unemployment rate for next year roughly
where it was last year. They did raise
their expectation of GDP a couple tenths
from where it was. So, to me that seems
to be, if you want to call it a hawkish
tilt, the one hawkish tilt. And of
course adding the extent and timing of
additional adjustments
uh to uh
rate policy going forward, that was
pretty much in the market. So, I think
mostly as the market expected and
nowhere near as bad as the market
feared.
>> So, not maybe as hawkish of a cut as
people thought it might have been.
Joining us now is Jim Bianco of Bianco
Research. Jim, what's your first
reaction to this decision, which as Bob
was saying isn't as bad as it could have
been. It could have been four dissents
or five dissents. Only three dissents.
Is this a victory for Jerome Powell?
It's a victory for Jerome, but I'll take
the other side, Bob. I'll say that it's
not as good as it could have been. I was
hoping for a 7-5 vote.
I was hoping for a Fed that was more
divided, that was more independent, that
was going to send an a message to the
administration
you could put a guy in that wants to go
to 1%, but he's not going to bully us to
cut rates next year just because he's
the Fed chairman. They kind of left the
door open. I think that the Fed can be
bullied by the next Fed chairman to do
the bidding of uh President Trump. Bob,
you you were saying that you wanted to
respond. Um, not as good as it could
have been with more dissents. I think if
you're the administration and you're
invested in this market, this is pretty
much as good as it could have been other
than no dissents. I'm not sure how
additional dissents make this better.
>> Will McKee dissent at the press
conference?
>> Let's find out. Mike, you were parsing
through this. You've got something to
add. What do you see?
Yeah, well the the point I'd like to
make is that the SEP shows that growth
is going to pick up significantly next
year. Unemployment is going to go down
and inflation is going to go down
significantly next year. So, what was
the rush to cut rates today if they
think that's the track that we're on? I
think that's going to be a key question
for J. Powell in the news conference. Uh
does this raise the possibility that
they could be going the wrong direction
with rates? There were some people who
made that case before we went into
today's meeting and they're going to be
still raising questions about it going
forward.
>> Michael McKee, thank you so much and we
will be catching up with you and of
course listening to your questions. Jim,
this is something that is near and dear
to your heart as you call yourself a
self-dubbed inflationista. Do you think
that this really adds to that
inflationary pressure if the Fed
essentially is accepting that they're
not going to get down to their inflation
target for six, seven, potentially even
eight years?
I I agree. I think that the Fed has to
be very worried about that. We're
worried about affordability right now.
This price CPI is up 27% since the end
of COVID. And that's what people are
upset about. How do we fix that? We need
the inflation rate to run below 2% for a
while so that wages can catch up. If the
inflation rate is going to stay at three
and moderate to two and a half, that is
going to keep the affordability anger
white hot over the next year to year and
a half or so. And so, I don't think that
accommodating that by cutting interest
rates is going to help. And that's the
question I hope the the chairman gets is
how are you helping affordability with
175 basis points of cuts in the last 14
months?
>> Jim, we got to review the past here. You
were a leader on saying that inflation
would be sticky. It was a lonely call
years and years ago and Bianco of
Chicago said, "You know what, folks?
We're not falling down to 2%." So, here
we are, Jim Bianco. I just want to know
the efficacy, Jim Bianco, where he says
in the press conference, basically one
and done. We made a rate cut. Maybe we
will have a sequence of future rate
cuts, but we really really now have to
wait and see what the data says. Isn't
that where we are, Jim Bianco?
Well, that's if that's what he says. And
again, what I was trying to say before
is if the chairman intimates that it's
one and done, he's the chairman who's
running the show and in May we're going
to have a hand-picked successor from
Donald Trump running the show and we
know what Trump thinks about interest
rates and that person's going to want to
have lower rates. But if he does say
that, then maybe the market will take it
a little bit differently and we'll see
if he does. But most of the time he'll
just say he's going to be data dependent
and it depends on what the data is. This
is an important vignette, folks, that I
think just so valuable. I'm in a room
with Axel Weber, Shirakawa of Japan, the
wonderful John Lipsky with all of his
work on New York Wall Street. Many other
worries. Tom Hoenig was there from
Kansas City. And the room fell silent,
Bob Michael, when they talked about the
next regime of the Fed and the risk here
that it would be cut cut cut cut. Is
that a legitimate fear that the next
chairman and the apparatus will allow us
to go towards some regime of new low low
rates? Well, I think you have to look at
which Fed presidents are coming onto the
FOMC
next year and they're mostly in the
hawkish camp. So, whoever you put in as
the Fed chair has to be very persuasive.
And I guarantee you the president isn't
looking to appoint the next Paul
Volcker. They're looking to appoint
someone who believes in supply-side
economics.
>> this is critical. This is absolutely
critical that we have an analog here
with the Bank of England that over time
has told the governor of the Bank of
England and their chairman equivalent,
"No, we're not in agreement. We're not
going to do it." Is that what our 2027
looks like?
>> Part of the problem is people get
overwhelmed by the state of events and
this is something that you talk about a
lot. And Jim, I'd love your thoughts on
that. This idea that this is a Fed that
is now buying bonds once more. buying
notes once more. And they're doing so
because of reserves issues and really
technical considerations for the market.
They don't want another repo freakout.
At this point though, it does indicate a
structural issue with how much debt is
out there, the government deficit that's
not going down, and a question of the
Fed's role. Are they being forced to
monetize the debt in a way that will
keep them artificially easy if you're
just going off the economic outlook?
I think they are at least being uh
forced to acknowledge fiscal dominance
that the fiscal situation is important.
Basically, the funding market, the repo
market, which funds the $38 trillion
Treasury market, is too small. It's too
small because the Fed has been doing QT
and reducing reserves. Those interest
rates, repo rates, have been going up.
Now, one answer could be to tell
Congress, "You can't spend as much
money. You can't run as big a deficit
cuz the funding markets can't handle
that size of a market." But if the Fed
wants to elect to let's expand the
funding markets to meet the size of the
bond market, you're telling Congress,
"Go ahead, spend more money. Run bigger
deficits. We've got your back. We'll
continue to expand that funding market
to meet those goals." And the biggest
driver of inflation over the last couple
of years, other than the supply shock
that we had in '21, has been government
spending. And they seem to be
encouraging more government spending.
Bob, do you agree with that?
Um, absolutely. 100%. But it doesn't
change the fact that that's what's
occurring and the market's responding to
that. I look at everything that just
happened in the last few minutes and you
know, everyone got what they wanted.
Those hawks on the Fed that didn't want
to see a rate cut, they got that. When
you look at the Fed futures market, we
had two rate cuts priced for next year,
mid-year and the end of the year. Now
there's only one price for next year and
it's in the fourth quarter. So, you got
what you wanted. You got the market
moving away from being in a rate cutting
regime going forward. But if you look at
the doves on the Fed, if you think about
the administration, they got what they
wanted. They got another 25 basis point
taken off of base rates and the market's
responding positively to that. It's rare
that everyone gets what they wanted out
of an FOMC meeting. Jim, I'd love your
comments on that. This idea that
everyone wins. If you do have
monetization of the debt, yes. You do
have ongoing fiscal spending, yes. But
that helps support the markets and we're
not seeing runaway inflation. So, what's
the problem?
We're going to get a new Fed chairman.
That's the the big issue. And the new
Fed chairman is going to be perceived to
be having a political agenda. And you
were hoping that the current members of
the FOMC were going to act as an
independent brake on a political agenda
that was coming in. And that's why I
wanted to see more dissents to be signal
that they were ready, willing, and able
to be that political brake. Now, maybe
they will once we get that new Fed
chairman, but then that looks political
that they didn't take the chance to do
it before the new guy came. Jim Bianco,
thank you so much as always for your
insights. This really is going to be the
debate. How does Fed chair J. Powell
position himself and position the FOMC
as being politically independent at a
time that's highly politically charged?
We hear every single day about the Fed
chair from this president.
>> of independence is the core issue,
particularly in the heritage of the Fed
back in 1951 and it's under threat, no
question about that. It'll be
interesting to see if the president
gives way. As Bob Michael mentioned, the
FT article today talking about well,
maybe it isn't 100% or 90%, Dr. Hassett.
And you get to a point where there's a
renewed debate. We'll have to see on
that. To me, it's a Chicago Fed meeting.
We had Goolsbee dissenting, which is a
shock in itself. And then Jim Bianco,
where this is wonderful. Diane Swonk
owns the high ground of Middle America
with KPMG. She's not out of three zip
codes in Manhattan and joins us
this afternoon. I I look Diane at this
moment and when I see Goolsbee's descent
and it's essentially a Chicago descent.
It's a descent of productivity. Do we
have any idea with this new AI that we
have a new productivity
that will allow for a better real GDP, a
more effective and efficient America?
We don't know that yet. What we do know
is that productivity growth has moved up
and that's because firms are doing more
with less. We don't know that it's all
from AI. We haven't seen enough adoption
of AI yet to get there. And also what we
don't know is how AI will be used,
whether or not we'll see a lot of new
jobs from this new innovation. That's
usually what we see from innovation.
Certainly that's not what Silicon Valley
is telling us at this point in time. And
also it matters who the gains of the AI
actually accrue to. If those
productivity gains continue to accrue to
the owners of capital instead of
workers, workers are going to feel left
behind and they're already feeling left
behind because of the fact that the
level of prices, as Jim pointed out, is
just too high. Even if inflation were to
cool from here, the level of prices are
still too high.
>> Lisa, I set up that question cuz I knew
what Dr. Swonk would say. Who's going to
be the winner of productivity? Who are
going to be the winners out there? And
that's the ultimate political tension.
>> Which is the reason why the Fed's role
in this is getting increasingly
politicized. Dan, I'd love your take on
how this Fed is taking into account
productivity gains of AI and talking
about Goldilocks cuz essentially that is
the scenario that they laid out in their
statement of economic projections.
Well, the Goldilocks scenario really
requires with productivity growth it to
be broad-based and actually people
always forget this part of it. If
productivity growth they raise their
growth rates for next year, if
productivity growth is driving gains in
overall economic growth, it means we can
actually have higher break-evens on the
Fed funds rate because the economy can
grow more rapidly without having to
lower rates. And I think that's
important as well. And so we've really
not seen all this yet and I think it's
still ahead of us. I am worried about
the fact that we're getting fiscal
stimulus in the form of the largest tax
refund surge on record in the first and
second quarter will hit between March
and May. And we know that those tax
refunds are treated like windfall gains
due to the expansions of tax cuts passed
in July of last year. They're
retroactive to beginning of 2025 and
that's going to be a big bump in fiscal
stimulus at a time when we're still
feeling the inflation from both tariffs
and changes in immigration policy. And I
think that's really important. We're
seeing service sector inflation pick up
as well. If that's the case, Diane, why
are not forward break-even rates rising
substantially? I was looking just now at
the five-year five-year forward forward
break-even rates and they actually went
down after this Fed decision, not up.
Even though exactly what you're saying,
if you do believe that there will be
some additional fiscal stimulus that
would be inflationary, you would think
that this rate decision would only
encourage those inflation fears.
I don't think I think we've seen some of
it in financial markets already. The
fact that it's not happening today
doesn't mean it won't happen. And we've
already seen some nervousness in the
bond market, skittishness about the size
of debt that they have to absorb, the
mega merger deals that are coming out
that are also financed by debt. All of
that together along with the fact that
we're now going to see in 2026
the government debt is going to eclipse
the size of the economy. It has not done
that since World War II. And so we're
moving into new territory and I think a
lot of things people are sort of looking
at the way the world was rather than
what's changing and things are changing
very rapidly. If you are just joining
us, we did get that Fed rate decision.
They did lower it by 25 basis points as
widely as expected. 9 to 3 votes, three
dissents. The news really is that Austin
Goolsbee joined Fed the Fed's Schmidt in
dissenting saying that they should not
lower rates. You of course had Stephen
Myron, Fed Governor, talking about a 50
basis point cut dissenting on the other
side. Not as many dissents as people had
expected. The Fed did revert back to
what we saw in the October statement
using language used just before pausing
rate cuts. So potentially the last Fed
rate cut for a long time by this chair,
Jay Powell. I'm just wondering, Bob, if
you think that right now this market is
saying they are okay to do this, that
the data that is available really
doesn't signal that this cut and then
maybe one more next year really is going
to be inflationary.
Well, I think that's what the market's
hoping for. I think there are a lot of
businesses that we invest in where we do
see the productivity gains from AI
already.
We also know within our own bank there
are significant productivity gains. So
some of that is already out there. The
unfortunate price reset from pre-COVID
levels to today is also a problem. I get
that. But that's dampened aggregate
final demand. What do we want going
forward? Do we want the disinflation we
seem to be in and what the Fed is
projecting or do we want deflation where
prices come down? I would argue we still
want disinflation and hopefully there
will be a point in time in the
not-too-distant future where wage growth
and the trend in disinflation will
normalize prices again. But all of that
still is ahead when to consumption. So
businesses are very careful how much
cost increases they push through now.
Can I do a counterfactual? Please. Diane
Swonk, if we got a 50 beep Myron cut,
what would happen to the American
economy now? The with the
financialization of the American system,
if you gave us a 50 beep cut now, it'd
be a veritable banking explosion,
wouldn't it?
It would certainly add a lot more
stimulus to what we're already seeing
and stimulus is heat. Heat is inflation
unless you can really get all those
offsets from AI in the right places. And
I think that's the hard part is the old
economy is where the tariffs are hitting
the hardest in manufacturing activity.
And we are seeing it come through in
prices and we're also seeing labor
shortages even as the labor market
weakens in pockets where immigrants have
dominated. That's showing up in prices
as well in home elder care, child care
costs all soaring. That was just in
September and those shortages have only
gotten worse since then.
>> Lisa, 2:20:20, I looked at the clock
right when Diane Swonk said tariffs. We
one first time we got the tariffs was 20
minutes into the show. For most of our
audience, tariffs are a big deal.
They're affecting their groceries, their
health care, everything in the service
sector as well.
>> Yeah, plastic Christmas trees 15 to 20%
higher because of tariffs. There you go.
So this also is going to
>> Christmas tree or fake?
>> Fake Christmas tree, but it's also
increasing the the real ones because
other people Diane Swonk, we'll let you
stay out of this conversation. Thank you
so much for being with us. Joining us
now for this conversation, not this
conversation. Matt Luzetti of Deutsche
Bank with us as you typically do before
the Fed press conference. Matt, just
first, what's your impression? 9 to 3,
was this what you thought would happen?
Yeah, to be honest, I think in terms of
the statement, the SEP, the dissents, I
think it very was very much in line with
expectations. You know, certainly there
was scope to get greater dissents from a
hawkish direction than what we got. I
think four regional Fed presidents,
potentially Governor Barr, was also
leaning against this cut. But we always
thought that it was the job of Chair
Powell through the statement, the
language change that we got there. But
then I think coming up to the press
conference, signals that he sends to try
to rein in some of those dissents, to
have a hawkish message that allows, you
know, those officials to speak through
that. And so I think we probably got
that as well. You know, you're seeing
markets respond by taking rates down. I
don't think that's really anything that
we saw in the statement or the SEP or
the dissents. I think it really was the
Fed ramping up reserve management
purchases, these T-bill purchases a
little bit earlier than was expected.
Matt Luzetti, Binky Chadha is high on
the street looking at the equity
markets. He says the stock market's
going to go up up up. How do you attach
Luzetti economics to Binky Chadha's huge
equity outlook?
Yeah, I think you know, the good thing
about how we do it here, it's internally
consistent. So I think Binky takes our
economic growth forecast, our global
economic growth forecast and builds that
into his earning projections. We have
2.4% growth for the US economy over the
next year.
That was sounding, I think, quite
bullish relative to consensus
expectations. But I would note the Fed
meeting and forecast came up to 2.3%
today. I think was revised higher than
what many anticipated and that is now
much closer to our own expectations. So
I think these two things are mutually
reinforcing. We see a stronger growth
backdrop. We see financial conditions
easing through Binky's equity channel
and those two things reinforcing each
other over the next year. Matt, your
other colleague, Jim Reid, put out a
provocative question earlier this
morning saying, what if the next Fed
move was up? At what point do you think
that the move that the Fed is laying out
really sets up that counterfactual in a
more real way?
Yeah, certainly a provocative question
and I think over the next year we're
getting more questions about that and I
think it's more coming from the global
sphere at this point. You're seeing, you
know, places like the RBA
turn a little bit more hawkish. There's
questions about the ECB, Bank of Canada
are seeing stronger economic data as of
late.
For the Fed specifically though, I think
you You uh two things to happen. One,
you have to have a clear elimination of
downside risk to the labor market. We
are not there yet. There's still some
fragility in this labor market over the
next several months. You know, perhaps
by the end of next year we could get
there. And and two, you need the labor
market to return as a source of
inflationary pressure. So, you need the
unemployment rate to decline, quits rate
to move higher, and wage growth to
accelerate. I think it's possible. I
think you are seeing a substantial uh
you know, reduction in labor supply in
the US economy. I think if you were to
add on even more fiscal stimulus, so if
we were to get these $2,000 stimulus
checks from the Trump administration, I
think that's the type of dynamic where
that could really shift the debate.
People would begin to think um a little
bit more actively about rate cuts uh in
the US. But to be clear, I don't think
we are there. Our baseline expectation
is the next move is a cut. Bob, what do
you think? What do you think it would
take for the Fed's next move or a move
next year to be a rate hike and not a
cut?
Well, I I I think you'd have to see the
fiscal stimulus from the one big
beautiful bill act hit and accelerate
business investment and consumer
spending. You'd have to see a labor
shortage resulting for that from that.
And you'd have to see a wage price
spiral.
Um maybe you'll see that in the second
quarter, but right now the Fed threaded
the needle. Can't we just enjoy this
until the holiday season?
>> us.
>> I'm with That's the smartest thing I've
heard today. That's the smartest thing
I've heard. And Powell's a piñata, I get
that. But the bottom line is
we have a prosperous economy for the
haves. Let's not upset that apple cart
while everyone, well-meaning, tries to
help people that are struggling so much.
I mean, that's threading the needle
right now is what we're doing. W- Well,
yes, but let's not forget that the one
big beautiful bill act also has no taxes
on tips, overtime, social security
payments.
>> Right. A lot of those are concentrated
in the bottom couple quintiles of
earners. So, there should be some relief
coming there. Where's your lack of
conviction, Matt Lasetti, on an outlook
in and off of this Fed meeting today?
Where's the question of your conviction
in the next year? What are you most
worried about?
I Yeah, I think in the very near term
it's that the labor market dynamic,
which is this fragile equilibrium with
low hiring and low firing, breaks to the
downside. Uh they begin to see layoffs
pick up. I really don't think we see
that evidence uh as of yet, but it's a
real risk over the next several months.
Do you agree?
>> I think over the course of of 2026, I
think uh there's some risk to the upside
here. Um you know, as Bob mentioned on
on the fiscal side, the stimulus checks
that have been floated, not part of our
baseline, but would be a very real
upside risk. Uh and then I think we just
can't put aside these risks around Fed
independence and um you know, we we
heard Treasury Secretary Yellen talking
about regional Fed presidents and and we
have to go through those votes. And you
have a Supreme Court case for Lisa Cook
coming up early next year. So, there I
think that there are a lot of risks
associated with it um from a Fed
independence
perspective, inflation risk potentially
to come,
uh long end of the bond market uh also
at risk potentially from that. Matt, we
have about 3 and 1/2 minutes before the
press conference begins. From your
perspective, what's the one question you
have for Fed Chair Jay Powell
potentially at the last Fed cut that he
oversees?
Yeah, I I think it's uh a little bit
around the language that they introduced
into the labor market and into the
statement. How are we to think about
that? Is that clearly sending a signal
uh that there's a much higher bar in the
near term? I also would ask him, you
know, are you internalizing what could
be a very weak jobs report next week in
today's decision? I think that's a
really important thing for the market.
Uh I think the Fed would probably want
to take out some of the sensitivity to
next week's data. I think one of the
reason that Chair Powell wanted to push
this rate cut through was an expectation
you could see some weakness there. M- My
expectation is, you know, next week's
data is going to be volatile. They are
really putting more weight on the
December jobs report in early January
uh in the data we're going to get early
next year in that assessment, but I'd
like to get confirmation of that from
the chair today. Matt Lasetti, thank you
as always for your time, and I look
forward to hearing what you think after
the Fed conference. This is at an
important point. How much is this in
some ways forecasting that December 16th
jobs report that we should have already
had? It should have been the sort of
one-two punch where last Friday we got
the November jobs report. They took that
data into hand, and then this meeting
they responded to it. Bob? Yeah, I I I
think you can go back to September and
say this is a another risk management
adjustment to policy that there are some
signs of a soft labor market. You're far
away from what you're forecasting as
your neutral rate. Why not take another
25 basis points off of that? It will
help corporate America. I'll get a lot
of questions in the next few days. Does
25 basis points actually do anything?
Let's remember most of corporate America
are small and middle market businesses.
Think of a $50 million EBITDA company.
They generally have seven times
leverage. They've got $350 million worth
of debt on top of 50 million in EBITDA.
It helps them a lot. It helps stabilize
middle market corporate America
significantly. If we say it's an
original meeting, we've got a staggered
in the next meeting, and we'll be wiser,
we'll have data and all that. But as
Lisa mentioned at the top of the show,
the political overlay here is
extraordinary. What did JP Morgan's
Washington experts say
about the politics of January?
Well, the question I would want to ask
Powell is were there only three
dissents, or was there a considerable
amount of bargaining to go from five
dissents to three dissents? And was that
in the statement? And then you ratcheted
it up GDP half a percent from where you
were at the last summary of economic
projections. His answers to questions
like that will tell you how politically
influenced the current Federal Reserve
Board is. That was a fantastic question,
and I hope that he gets asked that as as
we really look to understand just what
kind of clutch the Fed Chair holds over
this committee. Bob Michael, as always,
thank you so much for being with us for
all this time. Truly always one of the
absolute best. Right now in markets, a
collective sigh of relief. It could have
been a lot worse. That is sort of the
the message coming from it. The S&P up a
tenth of a percent. Nasdaq still
suffering a little bit down to tenths of
a percent. Suffering, I say. Still near
all-time highs. And the Russell 2000
seeing that pop up six tenths of a
percent. What you are seeing in the bond
space, twos, tens, and thirties is this
lift uh to a bond price down in yield as
people expect to see some sort of bond
purchases as well as a rate cut coming
in next year. It really seems to me that
Jay Powell really has the chance to
split the difference. We'll have to see.
I'm going to watch the bond vigilantes.
I think they're in the press conference
as well. Ed Yardeni's in there
somewhere. Well, let's just take a
listen to Fed Chair Jerome Powell at his
last press conference, that of the year,
and potentially of a rate
>> My colleagues and I remain squarely
focused on achieving our dual mandate
goals of maximum employment and stable
prices for the benefit of the American
people.
Although important federal government
data for the past couple of months have
yet to be released,
available public and private sector data
suggests that the outlook for employment
has not changed
as much since our meeting in October.
Conditions in the labor market appear to
be gradually cooling, and inflation
remains somewhat elevated.
In support of our goals in light of the
balance of risks to employment and
inflation,
today the Federal Open Market Committee
decided to lower our policy interest
rate by quarter percentage point.
As a separate matter, we also decided to
initiate purchases of shorter-term
Treasury securities solely for the
purpose of maintaining an ample supply
of reserves over time,
thus supporting effective control of our
policy rate.
I will have more to say about monetary
policy and its implementation after
briefly reviewing economic developments.
Although some key government data have
yet to be released,
available indicators suggest that
economic activity has been expanding at
a moderate pace.
Consumer spending appears to have
remained solid, and business fixed
investment has continued to expand.
In contrast, activity in the housing
sector remains weak.
The temporary shutdown of the federal
government has likely weighed on
economic activity in the current
quarter,
but these effects should be mostly
offset by higher growth next quarter,
reflecting the reopening.
In our summary of economic projections,
the median participant projects that
real GDP will rise 1.7% this year
and 2.3% next year, somewhat stronger
than projected in September.
In the labor market, although official
employment data for October and November
are delayed,
available evidence suggests that both
layoffs and hiring remain low,
and that both households' perceptions of
job availability
and firms' possession perceptions of
hiring difficulty continue to decline.
The official report on the labor market
for September, the most recent release,
showed that the unemployment rate
continued to edge up, reaching 4.4%,
and that job gains had slowed
significantly since earlier in the year.
A good part of the slowing likely
reflects a decline in the growth of the
labor force
due to lower immigration and labor force
participation,
though labor demand has clearly softened
as well.
In this less dynamic and somewhat softer
labor market,
the downside risks to employment appear
to have risen in recent months.
In our SEP, the median projection of the
unemployment rate is 4.5% at the end of
this year and edges down thereafter.
Inflation has eased significantly from
its highs in mid-2022,
but remains somewhat elevated relative
to our 2% longer run goal.
Very little data on inflation have been
released since our meeting in October.
Total PCE prices rose 2.8% over the 12
months ending in September,
and excluding the volatile food and
energy categories,
core PCE prices also rose 2.8%.
These readings are higher than earlier
in the year as inflation for goods has
picked up, reflecting the effects of
tariffs.
In contrast, disinflation appears to be
continuing for services.
Near-term measures of inflation
expectations have declined from their
peaks earlier in the year, as reflected
in both market and survey-based
measures.
Most measures of longer-term remain
consistent with our 2% inflation goal.
The median projection in the SEP for
total PCE inflation is 2.9% this year,
and 2.4% next year.
A bit lower than the median projection
in September.
Thereafter, the median falls to 2%.
Our monetary policy actions are guided
by our dual mandate to promote maximum
employment and stable prices for the
American people.
At today's meeting, the committee
decided to lower the target range for
the federal funds rate by a quarter
percentage point to 3 and 1/2 to 3 and
3/4%
In the near-term, risks to inflation are
tilted to the upside, and risks risks to
employment to the downside, a
challenging situation.
There is no risk-free path for policy as
we navigate this tension between our
employment and inflation goals.
A reasonable base case is that the
effects of tariffs on inflation will be
relatively short-lived, effectively a
one-time shift in the price level.
Our obligation is to make sure that a
one-time increase in the price level
does not become an ongoing inflation
problem.
But with downside risks to employment
having risen in recent months, the
balance of risks has shifted.
Our framework calls for us to take a
balanced approach in promoting both
sides of our dual mandate.
Accordingly, we judged it appropriate at
this meeting to lower our policy rate by
a quarter percentage point.
With today's decision, we have lowered
our policy rate 3/4 of a percentage
point over our last three meetings.
This further normalization of our policy
stance should help stabilize the labor
market, while allowing inflation to
resume its downward trend toward 2% once
the effects of tariffs have passed
through.
The adjustments to our policy stance
since September
bring it within a range of plausible
plausible estimates of neutral and leave
us well positioned to determine the
extent and timing of additional
adjustments to our policy rate based on
the incoming data,
the evolving outlook, and the balance of
risks.
In our summary of economic projections,
FOMC participants wrote down their
individual assessments of an appropriate
path of the federal funds rate under
what each participant judges to be the
most likely scenario for the economy.
The median participant projects that the
appropriate level of the federal funds
rate will be 3.4% at the end of 2026,
and 3.1% at the end of 2027,
unchanged from September.
As always the case, these individual
forecasts are subject to uncertainty and
they're not a committee plan or
decision.
Monetary policy is not on a preset
course, and we will make our decisions
on a meeting-by-meeting basis.
Let me turn now to issues related to the
implementation of monetary policy, with
the reminder that these issues are
separate from and have no implications
for
the stance of monetary policy.
In light of the continued tightening in
money market interest rates relative to
our administered rates,
and other indicators of reserve market
conditions,
the committee judged that reserve
balances have declined to ample levels.
Accordingly, at today's meeting, the
committee decided to initiate purchases
of shorter-term Treasury securities,
mainly Treasury bills,
for the sole purpose of maintaining an
ample supply of reserves over time.
Such increases in our securities
holdings ensure that the federal funds
rate remains within its target range,
and are necessary because the growth of
the economy leads to rising demand over
time for our liabilities,
including currency and reserves.
As detailed in a statement released
today by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, reserve management purchases will
amount to $40 billion in the first
month, and may remain elevated for a few
months to alleviate expected near-term
pressures in money markets. Thereafter,
we expect the size of reserve reserve
management purchases to decline, though
the actual pace will depend on market
conditions.
In our implementation framework, an
ample supply of reserves means that the
federal funds rate and other short-term
interest rates are primarily controlled
by the setting of our administered
rates, rather than day-to-day
discretionary interventions in money
markets.
In this regime, standing repurchase
agreement or repo operations are a
critical tool to ensure that the federal
funds rate remains within its target
range, even on days of elevated
pressures in money markets.
Consistent with this view, the committee
eliminated the aggregate limit on
standing repo operations.
These operations are intended to support
monetary policy implementation, and
smooth market functioning, and should be
used when economically sensible.
To conclude, the Fed has been assigned
two goals for monetary policy,
maximum employment and stable prices.
We remain committed to supporting
maximum employment, bringing our
inflation sustainably down to our 2%
goal, and keeping longer-term inflation
expectations well anchored.
Our success in delivering on these goals
matters to all Americans.
We understand that our actions affect
communities, families, and businesses
across the country.
Everything we do is in service to our
public mission.
At the Fed, we will do everything we can
to achieve our maximum employment and
price stability goals.
Thank you, and I look forward to your
questions.
Howard.
Uh thank you. Uh Howard Schneider with
Reuters. Uh just first turning to the
statement, the uh
just to be clear we're on the same page
here. The insertion of the phrase uh
considering the extent and timing of
additional adjustments, does that
indicate that the Fed is now on hold
until there's some clearer signal from
uh inflation or jobs or the evolution of
the economy along the baseline outlook?
So, yes, the um the adjustments since
September um
bring our policy within a broad range of
estimates of neutral.
And as we noted in our statement today,
we are well positioned to determine the
extent and timing of additional
adjustments based on the incoming data,
the evolving outlook, and the balance of
risks.
Uh that new language points out that
we'll carefully evaluate that incoming
data.
Uh and also, I would note that having
reduced our policy rate by 75 basis
points since September, and 175 basis
points since last September,
the fed funds rate is now within a broad
range of estimates of its neutral value,
and we are
well positioned to wait to see how the
economy evolves.
And if I could follow up on the outlook
there, it it it seems like with the
additional GDP growth coupled with
easing inflation and a fairly steady
unemployment rate, this seems like a
pretty optimistic outlook uh for next
year. Um what's given rise to that? Is
this an early bet on AI? Is there some
sense of uh improved improving
productivity out there? What's what's
driving that?
So, a number of things are driving uh
what's happening in the forecast. And I
would say if you if you look broadly at
outside forecasts, you do see a pickup
in growth in many of those. Now, to so,
it is um it's partly that consumer
spending has held up. It's been
resilient. And it to to another degree,
it is it is that uh AI spending on data
centers and related to AI has been
holding up business investment. So,
overall, um the the baseline expectation
for next year is at least at at the Fed,
and I think with with outside
forecasters, too, is a pickup in growth
from today's relatively low level of
level of 1.7%. I mentioned that the SEP
median is 1.7 for this year growth and
2.3 for next year.
You actually
some of that is due to the uh the
shutdown, so you can take 2/10 out of
and put it in 2025. So, it would really
be 1.9 and 2.1. But overall, yes, um you
know, the
you know, for a few reasons, fiscal
policy is going to be supportive,
and as I mentioned uh AI spending will
continue, the consumer continues to
spend. So, it it looks like uh
the baseline would be solid growth next
year.
Steve.
Uh thank you uh Mr. Chairman for taking
our questions here. Um
the uh
you had previously described rate cuts
in terms of a risk management framework,
and kind of following up on what Howard
was asking, um is the risk management
phase of rate cuts over here, and uh um
have you taken out sufficient uh
insurance, I guess, against potential
weakness in terms of the data we might
get next week when it comes to
employment?
So, we're going to get a great deal of
data between now and the and the January
meeting, and I'm sure we'll talk more
about that. And that will the data that
we get are going to factor into our
thinking. But yes, we have uh
if if you go back, uh we held our policy
rate at, you know, 5.4% for more than a
year because inflation was high, very
high, and unemployment when it and the
labor market was was really solid at
that point. So, what happened is over
last summer, summer of of of of '24,
um inflation came down, and the labor
market began to show real signs of
weakness. And so, we we decided, as our
framework tells us to do, that uh when
the when the risks to the two goals
become more equal, you should move from
uh a stance that favors really dealing
with one of them, in that case
inflation, to a more balanced, more
neutral setting. And so, we we we did
that. We did some cutting, and then we
we paused for a while to
work our way through uh what was
happening in the middle of the year. And
then we resumed cuts in in September.
We've cut now three. We've We've now cut
a total of 175 basis points. And as I
mentioned, you know, we we feel like uh
where we're positioned now puts
we're well positioned to wait and see
how the economy evolves from here.
If I could just follow up on the SEP, um
you have a whole lot of
a big increase in the growth numbers,
but not a big decline in the
unemployment numbers. And
is that an AI factor in there? What is
going on through the dynamic of you get
more growth, but you don't get a whole
lot of decline in unemployment? Thank
you, sir. So, it it is and the
implication is obviously higher
productivity. Um
and uh some of that may be AI. It just
also I think um productivity has just
been almost structurally higher for
several years now. So, if you start
thinking of it as 2% per year, you can
sustain higher growth without more
without more job creation. Uh of course,
higher productivity is also what enables
incomes to rise over long periods of
time. So, it's basically a good thing.
But that may be that's certainly the
implication.
Thank you. Colby Smith with The New York
Times. Um today's decision was clearly
very divided. It wasn't just the two
official dissents against the cut, but
there were also soft dissents from four
uh others. And I'm just wondering if um
this reluctance from several people to
support recent reductions suggests that
there is a much higher bar for cuts in
the near term. And and what exactly does
the committee need to see um if things
are well positioned right now um to
support a January reduction? Sure. So,
um let me just say,
as I mentioned uh and as I've mentioned
here before,
the situation is is that our two goals
are a bit in tension, right? So, um
interestingly,
everyone around the table at the FOMC
agrees that inflation is too high, and
that we want it to come down, and agrees
that the labor market has softened and
that there's further risk. Everyone
agrees on that.
Where the where the difference is is how
do you weight those risks, and what does
your forecast look like? And and and
where do you ultimately ultimately where
do you think the bigger risk is? And and
you know, it's very unusual to have uh
persistent tension between the two parts
of the mandate. And when you do, this is
what you see. And I think it's actually
uh
what you would expect to see, and we do
see it. Meanwhile, the discussions we
have are as good as any we've had in my
14 years at the Fed. They're very
thoughtful, respectful, and you just
have people who have strong views. And
you know, we we come together and and we
reach we reach
uh
you know, a place where we can make a
decision. We made a decision today. We
had, you know, nine out of 12 supported
it. So, fairly broad support. Um but
it's not like the nor normal situation
where everyone agrees on the direction
and what and what to do. It's more It's
more spread out, and I think that's only
inherent in the situation. In terms of
what it would take, you know, we all
have an outlook in terms of what's going
to come. But I think ultimately uh
having cut 75, and you know, the the
effects of the 75 basis points will only
begin to be coming in.
As I said before a couple times, we're
well positioned to wait to see how the
economy evolves. We'll just have to see.
And we will get, as you know, quite a
bit of data.
I should mention on the data, as long as
I'm
talking about it, that um
we're going to need to be careful in
assessing particularly the the household
uh
survey data. Uh there are there are very
technical uh
reasons about the way data are
uh collected in some of these measures,
both in in you know, in inflation and in
uh in labor
in the labor market. Uh so, that the the
data may be distorted, and not just not
just sort of more volatile, but
distorted. And and that's it's uh
the And that's really because data was
not collected in October and half of
November. So, we're going to get data,
but we're going to have to look at it
carefully and with a somewhat skeptical
eye by the time of the January meeting.
Notwithstanding that, we will have a lot
of the December data by the time of the
January meeting. So, we expect to see a
lot more, but I'm I'm just saying that
the what we get for for example CPI or
for the uh
for the um
uh uh household survey, uh we're going
to we're going to look we're going to
look at that really carefully and and
understand that it may be distorted by
very technical factors.
Um and just just um one more question on
dissents. I mean, you talk about it in a
very positive way, just given the
complicated nature of the situation
we're in economically. But is there any
point in which those dissents become
counterproductive either to, you know,
the Fed's communication and the
messaging around the policy path
forward?
I wouldn't I don't feel that we're at
that point at all. I don't. I I would
say, again, these are these are good,
thoughtful, respectful discussions. And
you hear people say, and you'll hear you
hear many many outside analysts say the
same thing. I could make a case for
either
for either side. I mean, I I could make
that case. It's it's a close call. We
have to make decisions.
And we you know, we always hope that the
data will will give us a clear read. But
in this situation, you you have you have
competing
as if you looked at if you look through
the SEP, you'll see that
a very large number of participants
agree that risks are to the upside for
unemployment and to the upside for
inflation. So, what do you do? You've
got one tool. It can't do two things at
once. So, at what pace do you move? How
how what what size moves do you make and
that kind of thing? And what what's the
timing of them? It's it's very It's a
very challenging situation. Uh I think
we're in a good place to, as I
mentioned, to wait and see how the
economy evolves.
Nick.
Nick Timiraos of The Wall Street
Journal. Um Chair Powell, there's been
some discussion recently of the 1990s.
In the 1990s, the committee did two
discrete sequences of three
quarter-point cuts, one in 1995-96, and
one in 1998. And after both of those,
the next move in rates was up, not down.
With policy now closer to neutral, is it
a foregone conclusion that the next move
in rates is down, or should we think of
policy risks as genuinely two-sided from
here?
So, I don't think that
um
a a rate hike is anybody's base as the
next thing is anybody's base case at
this point. And I'm not hearing that.
What you what you see is um some people
feel
we should stop here, and and that we're
at the right place, and just wait. Some
people feel like we should cut once or
more
this year and next year. But the the but
when people are writing down their
estimates of policy, of where it should
go, it it is is either holding here or
cutting a little or cutting more than a
little. So, I don't see that as I don't
see the base case as involving
that. So, of course,
you know, a a data set of two, now
three, is is not a big data set. But I
do you're you are right about those two
three cut times in in the '90s.
If I could follow up, the unemployment
rate has been rising very gradually for
the better part of 2 years. And indeed,
the statement today no longer describes
the unemployment rate as remaining low.
What gives you confidence it won't
continue rising in 2026,
especially when housing and other
rate-sensitive sectors still appear to
be feeling restrictive policy from the
uh notwithstanding the 150 basis points
in cuts prior to today? So, the the I
think the idea is that what with now
having cut 75 five basis points
more now, and having policy, you know,
call it in a broad range of of plausible
estimates of neutral,
that that will be a a place where which
will enable the labor market to
stabilize or to only pick up one or two
more tenths, but we won't see uh you
know,
any kind of a sharper downturn, which we
haven't seen any ev evidence of it at
all. At the same time,
uh policy is still,
in a place where
it's not accommodative, and and we feel
like we feel like we have made progress
this year in non-tariff related
inflation.
And it as tariffs come through, as they
flow through, that'll show through next
year.
But as I said, we're we're well past
well placed to to wait and see how that
turns out. That is our expectation, but
you know, we're going to start to see
the data, and it'll tell us whether we
were right or not.
Claire.
Claire Jones, Financial Times. Um
a lot of people interpreted your
comments at the October meeting that,
you know, when there's a foggy
situation, we slow down, to mean that,
you know, there wouldn't be a cut now,
there'd be a cut in January instead. So,
it'd be good to get a sense of why did
the committee decide to move today
rather than to move in January instead?
Thank you. Right. So, in October I said
um
that there was no certainty of moving,
and that was uh that was indeed correct.
I said it's possible you could think
about it that way, but I was careful to
say
other people could look at it
differently. So, why did we move today?
You know, I would say point to a couple
things. First of all, gradual cooling in
the labor market has continued.
Unemployment is now up 3/10 uh from June
through September. Payroll jobs uh
averaging 40,000 per month since April.
We think there's an overstatement in in
these numbers by about 60,000. So, that
would be -20,000
per month.
Um and also just to point at one other
thing, surveys of households and
businesses both showed declining supply
and demand for workers.
So, I think you can say that the labor
market has um
uh continued to cool gradually, maybe
just a touch more gradually than we
thought.
Um
you know, in terms of inflation, um we
are it's get coming a touch lower,
and I think the evidence is is uh kind
of growing that what's happening here is
services inflation
coming down, and
that's offset by increases in in in
goods, and that goods inflation is
entirely in sectors where there are
tariffs. So, that does build on the
story, and so far it's only a story that
this is that that the goods inflation,
which is really the source of the excess
at this point, that that uh most almost
more than half the source of the excess
inflation is goods, is tariffs.
And you've got to say then, so what do
we expect from tariffs?
Um and it's I would say that is to some
extent down to looking for broader
economic uh
you know, uh heat, you know, do we see a
hot economy? Do we see constraints? Do
we see what what's going on with wages?
You saw the ECI report today. It doesn't
feel like a hot economy that wants to
generate,
you know, Phillips curve kind of
inflation.
So, we look at all those things um
and we say that this was a decision to
make.
Obviously, it wasn't uh unanimous, and
um but overall, that was the judgment
that that we made, and that's the action
we took.
Just on the ample reserves point, how
concerned were people around the table
about some of the tensions we've seen in
money markets? Thank I I wouldn't say
concerned. So, what what really happened
is this um
uh
balance sheet shrinkage, sometimes
called QT, went on. We had a a framework
in place for monitoring it, and nothing
happened. The overnight reverse repo
facility
went down pretty much close to zero.
Uh and then beginning in in September,
uh
the federal funds rate started to tick
up within the range, right? And it
ticked up almost all the way to
uh interest on reserve balances. There's
nothing wrong with that. What that's
telling you is that we're actually in a
reserves in an ample reserves regime.
So, you know, we
we knew this was going to come.
When it finally did come, it came a
little quicker than expected, but we
were yeah, absolutely there to take the
actions that we said we would take. So,
and we those actions start today. So,
you know, we we announced that we're
resuming reserve management purchases.
That is completely separate from
monetary policy. It's just we need to
keep an ample supply of reserves out
there. Why so big? The answer to that is
uh
you know, if you look ahead, you will
see that that April 15th is coming up,
and our our framework is such that we
want to have ample reserves even at
times when reserves are at a low level
temporarily. So, that's what happens on
tax day.
People pay a lot of money to the
government, reserves drop sharply and
temporarily. So, this seasonal build-up
that we'll see in the next few months
was going to happen anyway. It was going
to happen because April 15th is April
15th.
There's also a secular ongoing growth of
the balance sheet. We have to keep
reserves,
call it constant as a as it relates to
the banking system or or to the whole
whole economy. And that alone calls for
us to increase about 20-25 billion
dollars per month.
So, that's a small part that that's
going on. It's also happening in the
context of a temporary
few month
uh
front loading to get to get reserves
high enough to get through the, you
know, the tax period in in in mid-April.
So, that's what's happening there.
Andrew.
Um
thanks, Mr. Chairman. Um
uh
this is the last post-FOMC press
conference uh before an important
Supreme Court uh hearing next month. Can
you talk about how you're hoping the
Supreme Court will rule, and uh I'm just
curious why the Fed's been so reticent
on such a pivotal matter?
It's not something I want I want to
address here, Andrew. Um
you know, we're not uh we're not legal
commentators.
It's it's before the courts, and uh we
think our
we
we don't think that we help matters by
trying to engage as a as a as a as a
public discussion of that. I'll give you
a mulligan, though. No, thanks.
Uh I don't know if that means I get
three questions, but uh uh I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I
>> I don't think it rises to that level.
So, I did think that in in 2000 and was
it 19, where we cut three times, but
you know, this is such a unique
situation. We this is it's not um
uh it's not the 1970s, let's put it that
way, but we do have tension between our
two goals. And so, that's that's just
unique in in my time at the Fed, and I
think going back a long ways, we haven't
had that
in our framework. Our framework, as you
know, says that when that's the case, uh
that we try to, you know, take a
balanced approach to
to the two things, and we look at how
far they are, and how long it would take
to get them back to each of them back to
the goal. And that's a very subjective
analysis, really. But it just tells you
you've got a And I think ultimately what
it says is when they're broadly equally
threatened or equally at risk, you
should be kind of neutral. Cuz if you're
if you're either accommodative or
or or tight, you're favoring one or the
other goal. And so, we've been trying to
we've been sort of
moving in the direction of neutral. Now,
we're in the range of neutral. We're in
the high end of the range of neutral, I
would say. And that's what we're doing
now. It it so happened that we we've cut
three times. You know, we have we
haven't made any decision about January,
but as as I've said, we think we're well
positioned to
uh wait and see how the economy
performs.
Edward.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Edward Lawrence uh
with Fox Business. I wanted to ask you
um the inflation expectations uh has has
come down in your SEP report. Um do you
see the tariff price increases as
passing through in the next 3 months? Is
it a 6-month process that we're looking
for that to end? And then because of
that, is jobs the threat to the economy?
So, with with tariff inflation, you
know, it it takes there's the
announcement of a tariff, and then
there's, you know, they start to take
effect, and then it it takes some
months.
Goods may have to be shipped from other
parts of the, you know, it may take,
you know,
quite a while for an individual tariff
to take its full effect. But once it's
had that effect, then the question is
isn't that just a one-time price
increase? So,
we've actually we actually look at it
all of the announcements, and and and
and what you get from all that, you see
sort of a for each one of them, there's
a time period that then it's fully in.
So, if there are no new tariff
announcements, and we don't know that,
but let's assume there are no major new
tariff announcements, inflation from
goods uh
should peak in the first quarter or so,
right or roughly, you know, we haven't
been able to predict this with any
precision. No one is.
But call it the first quarter or or so
of next year should be the peak.
And from here, it should be
it shouldn't be big. It should be a
couple tenths or or even less than that.
We don't really have precision on this,
but And after that, again, if there are
no new uh tariffs that that are being
announced that will
take 9 months to get fully in. 9 months
is also an estimate.
Um then you should start to see that
coming down in the back half of next
year. And And I wanted to see if I could
address sort of the elephant in the
room. The president's been talking
openly about um a new Fed chairman. Does
that hinder your current job right now,
or change your thinking at all? No.
Like
No mulligans for it.
Like Like a McKee from Bloomberg Radio
and Television. Uh 10-year rates have
are 50 basis points higher than when you
started cutting back in September of
2024, and the yield curve basically has
been steepening. Uh why do you think
that
continuing to cut now, especially in the
absence of data, is going to bring down
the yield on the thing that will move
the economy the most?
So, we're we're looking at the real
economy and focusing on that. And you
you have you've got to when the when the
long bonds move around, you've got to
look at why they're moving around. If
you look at inflation compensation, it's
very you have that's one part of it is
is inflation compensation break-evens.
And you know, they're at very
comfortable levels. They're at levels
consistent um past the once you get out
past the very short term now.
Uh break-evens are at a, you know, at at
quite levels that are quite consistent
with 2% inflation over time. So, there's
nothing happening with rates going up
out there that suggests concern about
inflation in the long term or anything
like that. I mean, I look I look at
these things pretty regularly. Same
thing with surveys. Surveys are all
saying that uh
the public understands our commitment to
2%, and and expects us to get back
there. So,
so why why are rates going up? It has to
be something else. It must be, you know,
an expectation of higher growth or
something like that. And that's that's a
lot of what's been going on. I mean, you
saw a big move,
you know, toward the end of last year,
which was not to do with us. It was to
do with other developments.
Well, you just mentioned that um we're
the public is expecting you to get back
to 2% and Americans overwhelmingly are
citing high prices inflation as their
number one concern. Can you explain to
them why you're prioritizing
the labor market which seems relatively
stable to most people instead of their
number one concern inflation? So
we as you know we have
a network of contacts in the US economy
which is really unmatched. If you go
through the 12 Reserve Banks. So we hear
loud and clear how people are
experiencing um
really costs. It's really it's really
high costs.
And a lot of that is not the current
rate of inflation. A lot of that is just
embedded higher cost due to higher
inflation in 2022 and 23.
So that's what's going on. And so the
best thing we can do is restore
inflation to to to to its 2% goal and
our policy is is intended to do that but
also have a strong economy where real
wages are going up where people are
getting jobs and and earning money and
and
they're we're going to need to have some
years where real compensation is higher
you know it's positive significantly
positive so wages nominal wages are
higher than inflation for people to
start feeling good about affordability
the affordability issue. And you know so
we're we're working hard on that. We
want to we're trying to keep inflation
under control but also support the labor
market and strong wages so that people
are earning enough money and and feeling
economically healthy again.
Victoria.
Um Hi Victoria Guida with Politico.
Just to follow up on that. I mean this
is now the third time that you've cut
this year and inflation is around 3%. So
is the message that you're sort of
trying to send with that that you're
okay with where inflation is for now as
long as people understand that at some
point you still want to get back to 2%
because inflation is relatively stable
where it is.
Everyone should understand and the
surveys show that they do that we're
committed to 2% inflation and we will
deliver 2% inflation. But it's a
complicated unusual difficult situation
where the labor market is also under
pressure where job creation may actually
be negative. Now supply of workers has
also gone way down so the unemployment
rate hasn't moved that much but you know
it's it's a labor market that that seems
to have significant downside risks.
People care a lot about that. That's
their jobs. That's their ability if they
get laid off or if they're entering the
labor force to find work. So that's
that's really important to people. The
story with inflation and uh you know
we're well aware that this is a story at
this point is that
if you get away from tariffs inflation
is in the low twos right? So it's really
tariffs that that's causing the most of
the inflation overshoot and we do think
of those as likely to in the current
situation as likely to be a one-time
you know one-time price increase.
Our job is to make sure that it is and
we will do that job. But right now you
you've got this difficult balance and
there are risks to both sides. There's
no risk-free path. If we were if we you
know if it was just inflation and the
labor market was just really strong and
then we'd rates would be higher as they
were for more than a year. You know we
didn't have to worry about inflation
sorry about the about the labor market
because the labor market unemployment
was very low if you remember when
inflation was very high. There was a
labor shortage so we could focus
entirely on on inflation. Now it's
different. We actually have risks to
both.
And I think we're we're doing the best
we can for people. They also care about
their jobs. They do care about
affordability. And the best thing we can
do there is to is both to support
economic activity but also you know um
make sure that when tariff inflation
goes down and disappears inflation lands
around 2%.
I'm sorry.
Thanks so much Elizabeth Schulze with
ABC News. Just to follow up you keep
talking about job growth being negative.
Why do you think job growth is so much
worse than some of the official data?
Why do you think job growth is to follow
up on your comments about job growth.
Why is it so much worse than the
official data is suggesting?
Oh well we just we know I think it's
it's um
this is I don't think this is
particularly controversial. There's a
it's very difficult to to estimate job
growth in real time. They don't count
everybody. They have a survey and
there's been something of a systematic
overcount. And so we we expected and
they correct it twice a year. So the
last time they corrected it we thought
the correction would be 8 or 900,000. I
won't get the numbers exactly right and
that was that was exactly what happened.
So we think that that has persisted and
so there's a there's an overcount in the
payroll job numbers we think continuing
and it will be corrected. I don't have
the exact month in my head right now but
and that's just I don't I again I think
forecasters generally understand that.
So and we think it's about 60,000 a
month so 40,000 jobs could be negative
20 and you know that could be wrong by
10 or 20 in either direction but in any
case and but the thing is that's um
that's job creation in a way. That's job
that's demand. Labor supply has also
come down quite sharply so you know
if you had a had a world where there
just there's just no growth in workers
and you really don't need a lot of jobs
to have to have full employment. Some
people argue that's what we're looking
at. But I think a world where job
creation is negative I just think we
need to watch that situation very
carefully and be in a position where
we're where we're not you know pushing
down on job creation with our policy.
When we're talking about supply we have
seen major American employers like
Amazon site AI in job cuts. How much
right now are you factoring in AI into
the current weakness in the job market?
So it's probably part of the story. It's
not it's not a big part of the story
yet. We don't know whether it will be
but
you know for example if you look at
you can't miss the big announcements of
layoffs and and also companies saying
that they're they're not going to hire
anybody for a long time and they cite
AI. That that's all clearly happening.
At the same time
people are not filing for unemployment
insurance
and since job creation
job finding rates are extremely low. If
there were big numbers of layoffs you'd
expect the the continuing claims to go
up and you'd expect new claims to go up.
It really haven't much.
So it's it's a little bit curious.
Longer term though you know the the
question is what are we going to see
here and we don't we don't know but it's
you know there's a it may be that
in past technology really significant
tech technology in uh
uh
innovation eras you have seen some jobs
destroyed and other jobs made.
Ultimately what's happened for a couple
hundred years is when you get through
all that you have higher productivity
and you have you have new jobs and there
are enough jobs for people. This is a
this may be different. You know it's
every time we have a wave of technology
we think oh it this could this could put
a lot of people out of work. What are
they going to do?
In the past there's always been more
work and higher productivity and incomes
have risen.
What will happen here we're going to
have to see but right now is such an
early days. We don't think we see much
it's certainly not showing up in in
layoffs yet.
Enda.
Thank you Chair Enda Curran Bloom
Bloomberg News. Given the breadth of
views on the policy committee why is
there such a division of views between
>> what?
>> On the committee. Thank you. Why is
there such a division of views between
the presidents and the board members?
You know it's it's not so stark as that.
There there is def there the views are
are more varied on each in each group as
well. There's some of that but I would
say they're also governors and and uh
and and they're they're they're people
in in both on both sides in both groups.
I wouldn't put too much in that. Okay
I'm just to follow up please. Given your
growth upgrades
um how would you factor in uh what would
be the economic impact if the Supreme
Court is to strike down the tariffs that
they're currently hearing please in
terms of growth and inflation. Thank
you.
I I really don't know. It would do it
depend um
it would depend on a whole bunch of
things we don't know. So
can't really help you there.
Christine.
Thank you.
Thank you Chair Powell. Christine Romans
NBC News. Wanted to ask you about how
the higher income households are really
driving spending right now. They're
backed by home equity and stock market
wealth but lower income consumers are
really struggling with the accumulation
of five years now of rising prices. It's
price levels not really the inflation
rate holding some of these families
back. How sustainable is this so-called
K-shaped economy and and what are the
Fed's thoughts on whether that's a risk
going forward?
So we do
through our vast network of contacts and
just through our observation what's
going on in the economy we hear about
this a lot.
If you listen to the earnings reports
for
consumer facing companies that tend to
deal with low and moderate income people
they'll all say that we're seeing people
you know tightening their belts you know
changing products that they buy buying
less and that sort of thing. And so it's
clearly a thing. It's also clearly a
thing that you know asset values housing
values and and and
securities values are high and they tend
to be owned by people more at the higher
end of the income and wealth. So
as how sustainable it is I don't know.
Most of the consumption does happen by
people who have more means. I think you
know the top the top third accounts for
way more than a third of the consumption
for example. So
it's a good question how sustainable
that is. Uh You know, the best we can do
is to is to have a you know, price
stability
and a strong labor market. And what we
saw
for example, what we saw at the end of
the you know, the very very long
expansion that ended with the outbreak
of the pandemic, we saw that it was 10
years and 8 months or something like
that. The longest one in recorded
history. In the last 2 years, most of
the job the largest part of the wage
gains
were come going to people in the bottom
quartile the bottom part of the lower
low and moderate income. So, you know,
having a a strong labor market for a
long period of time is really really
good from a social standpoint. It it's
helping people at the lower income
levels and that's what we all want to
get back to.
But we got to we got to have price
stability and we got to have
you know, full employment maximum
employment. And just quickly you
mentioned the housing market remains
kind of weak with these rate cuts that
we've seen, is there a chance we're
going to see more affordability in the
housing market so more people can maybe
enjoy that part of wealth creation? I
mean the average age or median age of a
first-time home buyer is now 40 years
old. That's the highest on record.
Yeah, so the housing market faces um
some really significant challenges and
uh I don't know that you know, a 25
basis point decline in the federal funds
rate is going to make much of a
difference for people.
Um you know, housing supply is low.
Many people have very very low low uh
low rate mortgages from the pandemic
period and they kept refinancing and got
the the really low. So, it's may
expensive for them to move and you know,
we're we're a ways away from that
changing. Also, we're just we haven't
built enough housing in the country for
a long time and so a lot of estimates
suggest that we just need more housing
of different kinds. So,
housing's going to be a
you know, a problem and and you know,
really the tools to address it are are
we can we can raise and lower interest
rates, but we don't really have the
tools to address you know, a secular
housing shortage structural housing
shortage.
Chris.
Uh thanks Chris Rugaber at Associated
Press.
Um you mentioned on inflation
services inflation being low, goods
inflation looking like maybe it'll peak.
We had the wages report you mentioned
today showing moderating wage growth.
Where are there inflation risks? It
looks like inflation is cooling in your
view. At the same time you have
potentially negative hiring.
Why not why aren't we hearing more about
maybe more cuts in this environment?
Well, I think the risk of risk inflation
is pretty clear to see and that is you
know, we
we see
um higher inflation that large as I
mentioned most of the inflation
over target is from goods
and we think we estimate we expect
most of us that
that inflation will be a one-time price
increase and then come down. We just
came off an experience where
um inflation turned out to be much more
persistent than
anyone had expected. Is that going to
happen now?
Uh
you know, that's so that's the risk. The
risk is is either that that that tariff
inflation just turns out to be more and
more persistent maybe because uh
uh companies who are now holding back
from passing through the tariffs will
just keep doing that. So, you'll see you
see that. Um I think the other
possibility is is less likely and that
is just that uh
you know, the labor market gets tight or
the economy gets tight and you see you
know, just just traditional inflation. I
don't see that as particularly likely,
but uh so I I think you know, again uh
you know, all across the committee
uh
people see the the picture pretty
similarly, but see the risks quite
differently.
And some people do see the the inflation
risk and I I wouldn't dismiss that case.
I I don't dismiss that case, but you've
got to you've got to make an assessment
and this is the assessment we made.
Hi Chair Powell, Neil Irwin with Axios.
Um so, this has come up a couple of
times today, but to be clear, do you
believe that we're experiencing a
positive productivity shock whether from
AI or policy factors or whatever
and how much of that is how much is that
driving the higher GDP project
projection in the SEP?
So, yeah, I mean it
I never thought I would see a time when
we had you know, 5 6 years of 2%
productivity growth.
This is this is higher. You know, this
is definitely higher and it was it was
before
before it could be attributed to AI.
I think you I I also think if you look
at what AI can do and if you use it in
your personal life as I I imagine many
of us have, you can see the prospects
for productivity. I think it makes
people who use it more productive.
It may make other people have to find
other jobs though. So, so it could have
productivity implications while also
having you know, social and labor market
implications that we don't have the
tools to deal with. But yes, I think we
are seeing we're definitely seeing
higher productivity. I don't I think
it's a little quick to be saying it's
it's generative AI.
But um
I don't know, you know, the the pandemic
may have induced people to do more
automation and do more things with
computers to replace people
and that raises productivity the you
know, output per hour.
Does that does that imply a higher does
that imply a higher neutral rate and
therefore the policy might be a little
easier than it seems? All you know, all
things equal yes, but all things aren't
equal. There are many many things
pushing in in different directions on
where the neutral rate would be. But
yes, that that argument does come up.
Uh Matt Egan.
Thanks Chair Powell, Matt Egan with CNN.
Um after today you only have three more
meetings at the helm of the Fed. Since
becoming Fed Chair you've seen multiple
trade wars, the pandemic COVID
reopening, period of high inflation. I
know your term's not up as Chair until
May, but I'm wondering if you've given
any thought to what you want your legacy
to be.
My legacy. I
My thought is that
um I really want to turn this job over
to whoever replaces me
in with the economy in really good
shape. That's what I want to I want I
want inflation to be under control
coming back down to 2% and I want the
labor market to be strong. That's what I
want.
And all of my efforts are to to get to
that place. They have been all along,
but ultimately
that's that's what I'm and it's you
know, I don't have time to think about
the bigger things. I have I have I have
many years ahead to
worry about that, but there's enough to
do.
Relatedly,
have you given any more thought and can
you tell us any more about your plans on
whether or not you plan to stay on the
Fed Board of Governors even after your
term as Chair expires? Again, I'm I'm
focused on I'm focused on my remaining
time as Chair. I haven't
got anything new on that to tell you.
All right, Mark for the last question.
Chairman Mark Hamrick with Bankrate.
Even while many price levels remain
elevated, the reductions in the federal
funds rate means that savings rates or
yields to be more precise have peaked
while key borrowing rates remain
elevated and that's as we've discussed
here as many Americans struggle with
liquidity or emergency savings
challenges. Is that just collateral
damage or an unintended consequence
because your tools are limited in
addressing individual or household
liquidity constraints insufficient money
in the bank?
I
don't know I would I wouldn't
agree that that's collateral damage of
our of our I mean over time
over time we do what we do in order to
create price stability and maximum
employment and those things are hugely
valuable to to all the people we serve.
Um when we raise rates to bring
inflation down,
you know, that does work by slowing the
economy, but we've moved back our rate
our policy back down to where it's not
it's certainly not strongly restrictive
at this point. I think it's sort of in
the range of neutral.
Um so, that's what we're trying to do
and uh
I would want people to understand to
understand that. I think what what
people are feeling is
the effect of higher prices. There was a
global wave sort of every large economy
in the world certainly every every large
open economy
uh market-based economy in the world had
a wave of inflation that looked an awful
lot like ours.
We actually came through better than any
other country substantially better. We
had higher growth, we had better labor
market and this is really due to the
American economy. Uh we have an
extraordinary economy and uh
you know, people are innovative, they
work hard
and
so,
you know, we're all of those all of us
who work in economics jobs are really
fortunate to have to have the US
economy. So, thank you very much.
This is the Fed decides on Bloomberg
Television and Radio Fed Chair Jay
Powell wrapping up his news conference,
the last news conference of 2025. A Fed
that's divided, but not as divided as it
could have been and a Chair Powell that
was trying to be somewhat hawkish, but
wasn't as hawkish as he could have been.
In fact, the market is taking this as
more of a dovish tilt than expected. You
could see the markets take off around
2:44 p.m. when he talked about
productivity. You could see the Russell
2000 up almost 2% on the heels of his
comments. Nasdaq up 6/10 of a percent
S&P up 8/10 of a percent. In the bond
space, a huge bid into the front end. A
disproportionate bid especially because
this is a Federal Reserve that's going
to buy $40 billion of T-bills on Friday.
This is earlier than people expected.
It's a 7-point 7 basis point drop at the
front end to 3.54. Much more muted at
the long end. Bigger questions here with
the 30-year at 4.78%
and when you bleed it through the
currency space, it is a weaker dollar,
markedly so, with the euro almost
breaking 117 116.92, up about half a
percent on those comments. Take a
listen. Fed chair speaking just a moment
ago, in particular about productivity
and its effect on the economy. Take a
listen. The implication is obviously
higher productivity. Um
and uh some of that may be AI. It just
also, I think uh productivity has just
been almost structurally higher for
several years now. So, if you start
thinking of it as 2% per year, you can
sustain higher growth without more
without more job creation. Uh of course,
higher productivity is also what enables
incomes to rise over long periods of
time. So, it's basically a good thing,
but that may be that's certainly the
implication. The idea of productivity
underpinning the ability for Goldilocks
to take hold, where essentially
inflation can remain in check while the
GDP continues to expand at the level
that we've seen so far.
>> it up earlier and it came up twice in
the press conference. I I'm looking at
the data and it tells me the bond
vigilantes are out this afternoon.
There's no question about that. So,
where's the happy happy? And the happy
is is this American economy different
than we used to know and even different
than what we perceive right now, that
the gloom is just unfounded as we bet on
this productivity down the road.
>> This is the reason why this is a Fed
that can increase its GDP expectations
and leave unemployment rates relatively
low and still cut maybe once more next
year, maybe once more in 2027. Also
talking about the potential for some
sort of
uh ongoing easing, even though they're
in the neutral range, because of the
softness that they see in the labor
market. The other aspect of this press
conference, and I do want to highlight
this, is QE. And no one's going to call
it QE, certainly not the Federal
Reserve, but they are going to start
buying bills sooner than they expected.
Take a listen to what he had to say
about that. Reserve management purchases
will amount to $40 in the first month
and may remain elevated for a few months
to alleviate expected near-term
pressures in money markets. Thereafter,
we expect the size of reserve reserve
management purchases to decline, though
the actual pace will depend on market
conditions. Joining us now to talk about
all of this is Stephanie Roth of Wolf
Research. Stephanie, would love your
take on what the most important part of
this news conference was. Was it the
emphasis on productivity or is it the
emphasis on QE light?
I I I mean, the combination of the two.
I think the productivity thing is is
important. We saw GDP get revised up. Of
course, some of that had to do with
government shutdown. But even taking
that out, the 20 basis points out for
26, that still is higher GDP numbers,
the the the median dot looking the same
for for Fed funds and unemployment rate
uh you know,
you know, remaining uh where it is. In
which case, we're talking about a
productivity
boom to some extent. And I think he he
was trying to say that perhaps we're
going to get a a a
a jobless uh pick up in growth next
year, which could at the margin be a
little bit more dovish. And then of
course, the market is reacting to the
the surprise in terms of the the Fed
buying bills,
which was a
notable in terms of timing and then
notable in terms of the amount. So, it
was overall, even though it was supposed
to be a hawkish cut based on many
expectations, but it ended up being
fairly dovish result.
>> The cross currents here of a non-snooze
fest. And I think the summary here for
everyone, including the president of the
United States, is the mandate is 2%.
This goes back ages. Are we really
jawboning our way to a new mandate,
which is 2.x% or dare I say 3.0%?
I don't think so. I mean, they they they
in in their projections, they have lower
inflation numbers. I think that's right.
I think we're going to be in an
environment where inflation is gradually
moving lower. If if if we if you were to
ask most forecasters by this point,
would inflation actually be running just
around 3%? I think no. I think the the
pass-through on inflation has been a lot
less than many had anticipated. Margins
have been kind of okay. It's gone a a
lot better than most forecasters
thought.
>> thought, one of my interviews of the
year was Nancy Lazar. We had Nancy Lazar
at the beginning of the show and she
nailed it when she said there's all this
Fed mumbo jumbo, but it's just a
cyclical slowdown. Do you bet at Wolf
Research in a cyclical recovery here as
Anna Wong alluded to today? Yeah, I
think that's right. I think we're
starting to see signs of it. Of course,
it's mixed at best. Job openings
starting to pick up. You're seeing temp
hiring start to look a little bit
better.
It seems to be just a cyclical slowdown
in part driven by tariff-related
uncertainty. As that uncertainty starts
to fade, you're likely to see an
improvement in growth. The Fed's
probably not going to cut through the
first half of next year. And it's going
to be an environment where the the
economy's running fairly firm. Something
that you noted is that this had a sort
of dovish tilt to it. I think it's
really important to note that. That's
certainly the response that we're seeing
in markets across the board. They talked
about weakness in the labor market. J.
Powell was talking about 40,000 jobs
getting created each month, saying you
can downgrade that by about 60,000 if
you take looking back.
>> you for bringing this up.
>> All of a sudden, you're looking at
implied weakness that they're sort of
bringing forward from the report that
we're going to get next week. How
credible do you see that, especially
given the guidance that he kept
emphasizing that they hear from the
regional Fed uh districts? I mean, I was
surprised by his estimates on QCEW, the
assumption that it's going to be a
60,000 downward revision. My estimate is
about half of that. Um so, that was a
that was a pretty dovish statement. That
was the sort of the higher end of what
it could have been, suggesting that at
least his his view on the labor market
is we're we've been running with minus
20,000 uh nonfarm payrolls for quite
some time. That's pretty dovish. I think
what will surprise most folks is in the
next couple of months, you'll probably
see a bit of a bounce back in terms of
hiring.
>> were on the phone talking with your
children about Alonzo from the Mets to
the Orioles and you missed when he
talked about the job adjustment, the
market moved. Yeah.
>> I mean, the fact is the market the bond
vigilantes walked away and you got a
price up, yield down at that moment.
>> Yeah, I mean, my son actually messaged
me, "Could I please have money for more
food to cope with Alonzo siding with the
Orioles?" And I gave him $2 because in
terms of my current financial situation,
that's all that that's worth to me. So,
anyway, we're looking though at
essentially a message from the Fed that
you can have your cake and eat it, too.
That this inflation, for the most part,
was driven maybe by the tariffs, but
that is transitory, for lack of a better
word. And going forward, there is going
to be this productivity boom that's
going to help support things. How much
does this really line up with two more
rate cuts in 2026, 2027?
Um how much does this line up to either
more rate cuts or potentially a rate
hike? Uh I certainly don't think
there'll be a hike and it seemed like
Powell dismissed that, too.
I think you could see some more rate
cuts in the back part of next year
because what you'll likely see is the
first part, you might elevate inflation
should still be a little bit elevated.
You're going to see that cyclical pick
up. In the back part of next year, you
might think start to see the economy
cool down a little bit and then
inflation's likely to slow back down
because that's where you're passing that
peak of of of tariff-related inflation.
And that could be an environment where
they could cut a couple more times,
albeit slowly. And and that's cuz you're
going to see a sort of a fairly sluggish
job trajectory. And if they're chopping
off an extra 60,000 off that, they're
going to be even more cautious on the
labor market than the the payrolls
numbers would suggest.
>> As as we speak, Lisa, the twos-10
vanilla spread goes out to a new steeper
yield curve. And the the bond market's
speaking here in space.
>> Speaking that frankly, this is a Fed
that's going to lower the front end as
much as they can. Uh but on the long end
yields, there is less control over that.
Let's bring back Bloomberg's Michael
McKee, who is in that room asking
questions. Mike, potentially the last
press conference with a rate cut from
Fed chair J. Powell, a notable one for
its somewhat dovish tilt.
Well, I'm not sure it was a dovish tilt.
I think the the uh chair tried to keep
his uh options as open as possible. You
noted that he suggested that there may
be some data uh accuracy problems with
the numbers for the jobs report and the
CPI that we're going to get next week
and into
into January, the catch-up from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics and the
Bureau of Economic Analysis as they get
out the data that we missed during the
uh government shutdown. And so, I think
they don't want to put themselves in a
position of saying uh that we're leaning
one way or another. And by doing that,
because they've cut so many times in a
row, it sounds uh a bit like they're
still dovish, but I don't think that's
the case anymore. And you do have some
people, and I noted what Stephanie just
said, but uh you do have some members of
the committee, the overall committee,
who suggested we might see rate
increases next year. Uh the thing I
think maybe out of all of this that you
want to pull out is uh Powell's emphasis
when he was answering my question about
uh we need to see wage increases. And
wage increases are going to depend on
the status of the labor market. If wages
are going up, then people are less
concerned about inflation. If uh wages
are not going up, then that's a problem
uh for the American public and it also
is a problem for the overall economy.
Michael McKee, thank you so much, as
always, for all your work at the Fed
press conference and before. Right now,
we are getting comments from President
Trump, who's speaking at a round table
in the White House. He's talking about
his ongoing criticism of Jerome Powell,
saying we should be able to do more than
3% or 4% GDP. He has said repeatedly to
late Powell, has talked about that guy,
he's not doing a very good job and they
would have fired him. And ultimately,
this just sort of reiterates the split
screen of Jerome Powell on one hand and
President Trump on the other really
highlights the political pressures
coming down the pipe in 2026.
>> We've got a great headline team. Here's
a headline, the president, "Don't see
why we can't have 20% to 25% GDP
growth." I think all of the adults,
whatever their belief, dissent here,
dissent there, are dealing with a
president who's got a a very vociferous
cacophony of opinions on the economy.
You don't plan on Donald Trump's
economic vision. That's all there is to
it.
>> He's a debt guy. He's a developer. Of
course he wants rates to be lower. He
also said that the Fed interest rates
could have been doubled in terms of the
amount of cuts. I'm just wondering, uh
Stephanie, from your perspective, if you
had gotten 50 basis points of rate cuts,
how much would that have turbocharged
2026?
It It would have, but then I'd be afraid
that the long end of the of the bond
market would have backed up even more
than it has been most recently. That
would be not a great outcome because
that's an environment where
we're we're truly turbocharging uh sort
of sort of the economy from rate
perspective, but then you have long ends
backing up. That's not good for markets.
The We're not in an environment where we
need to be in at 50 basis point cuts.
It's a question whether they should have
been cutting 25 basis points today, let
alone should they be cutting even more
than that.
>> Joining us now uh to join the
conversation Aditya Bhave of Bank of
America. Aditya, just before we get
started, kind of a dovish tilt,
certainly that's the way it's being
received by markets. Do you think that
this is the right call as the Fed
accelerates the timeline for bills
purchases and talks about the ongoing
deterioration in the labor market?
Good afternoon. Thanks for having me.
So, we were skeptical going into the
meeting about whether Chair Powell would
really be able to deliver a hawkish cut
given how much data we're getting
between now and the January meeting. And
indeed he didn't. They kind of nudged in
the direction of okay, we should
probably stay on hold or our base case
for January is a hold, but they can't
close the door on January. We thought
the one arrow in Powell's quiver that he
hadn't fired at his hawkish press
conferences at July and October, which
by the way didn't change the policy path
at all. The one thing he had left to say
was policy is at neutral. And he got
very close to saying that. He said we're
within the plausible range of estimates
of neutral, but then when he gave his
own opinion, he said we're probably at
the higher end of that range. So, I
think he still left the door open for
January, but they really want to tell us
that the base case is a hold for
January.
>> Then if we're at that tip point, which
will matter more, an analysis of
inflation or an analysis of the job
market?
I think they're still more focused on
the labor market. A simple way to think
about it, which maybe he muddied the
waters a little bit by talking about the
measurement issues with the unemployment
rate, but we're going to get not only
the November unemployment rate, but also
the December unemployment rate before
the January meeting. If that December
unemployment rate is up to 4.7%,
I think they're going in January. 4.5 or
lower, they're going to stay on hold,
and 4.6 is going to be a close call.
>> Really well said, but then what's so
important here within this, and let's
look at the Bank of America now GDP
report. I got Atlanta at 3.5.
Where is the economy right now? Just say
in terms of nominal GDP. It's a boom
economy, isn't it?
Yep. It is. We have around 5% nominal
GDP growth for next year, and that's
well above consensus. We were very happy
to see that the Fed is coming very close
to our view now. The GDP upgrades were
quite significant, but honestly, it's
not that hard to get into the low to mid
twos next year. As Powell mentioned,
you'll get about two tenths, maybe even
three tenths just from the shutdown.
You're going to get another three to
four tenths from the big beautiful bill.
So, the hurdle for the rest of GDP
growth is only about 1.7, 1.9%, which
frankly is what we did this year, even
with all the trade disruptions. So, we
should be in the twos next year in my
view. Stephanie, it strikes me that
there's a new psychology taking hold of
the Fed that has been for the past 6
months, and it goes to Tom's point about
productivity. This idea that at times of
transition, it pays to run the economy
hot to avoid some of the jobs losses
that do come into effect in these huge
technological shifts that take hold. Do
you think that that is what's going on?
That this is a Fed that is biased to
running the economy hotter than it
otherwise would because there are job
losses during times like this, and those
job losses are hard to replace even as
productivity comes back. Yeah, I think
that's exactly what's happening. That's
kind of what Powell alluded to today.
That this is product productivity
enhancing uh backdrop that we're seeing.
They're certainly coming across as, you
know, more dovish than generally
expected. They're going to and and and
they're going to take a haircut off the
the job numbers that we're getting
whether or not 60,000 is the right
number. So, any numbers that we get from
a job perspective, you have to in your
mind take that down even lower, which
then is is at the margin going to make
them more dovish in running the the
economy hotter than what otherwise be
the case.
>> The sum total here, Lisa, is what the
gentleman from Bank of America said. You
get a 4.7%
unemployment rate, none of this summit
analysis matters into midterm elections.
4.7 is getting up there, and I can't
imagine 4.9 or 5.0. Which is the reason
why, Aditya, to bring you back in,
you're talking about the chance of a
potential additional rate cut come
January should we get that kind of
employment stress. What are you seeing?
Were you surprised, just to pick up on
the conversation we were having with
Stephanie, were you surprised at how
negative Jerome Powell was in his
interpretation of the labor market and
the job losses that we've seen over the
past few months? That was definitely a
dovish surprise to talk about, you know,
we're we're going to mark down 40,000 a
month by 60,000 per month. So, now
you're looking at negative 20. And then
at the same time he says that he doesn't
expect the unemployment rate to go up a
lot further from here. So, what is his
read on break even? He had previously
told us his read on break even was
between zero and 50,000. So, a little
bit of inconsistency there in our view.
If they stick with the view that break
even between zero and 50, and we're only
growing at negative 20, then either you
need to see payrolls bounce back or
they're going to continue to worry about
downside risk to the unemployment rate.
And again, it's not our base case that
they're going to keep cutting rates, but
they might well be inclined to do so.
Aditya Bhave, thank you so much for
being with us this morning. Joining us
now is Jeff Rosenberg of BlackRock.
Jeff, always great to speak with you.
Want to get your take about whether what
we had just heard in that press
conference makes you incredibly more
risk on in terms of going out
double-fisting it. QE light is coming
back. They're buying bills. They're also
potentially looking to weakness in the
labor market. Is this risk on?
Well, um you said one of my three
takeaways, which is number three of
today's meeting, which I'll call, you
know, QE confusion. I'll come back to
that. The first takeaway is the pause is
in.
We kind of knew that. The second one,
which you've already talked about, is
why? Because we're in the realm of
neutral.
Uh and the third is getting a little bit
of confused about about the QE
confusion. It was a little bit more
dovish than maybe expected as the
previous commentators talked about. Uh
but it's not that far off of
expectations. The markets had about a
90% expectation for the 25 basis point
cut. Uh expected for a pause. It'll be
data dependent as you were previously
discussing. If it's 4.7, you know,
that's a different set of circumstances.
And Tom, as you said, you know, you can
throw the rest of this analysis out the
window because the facts have changed.
But we don't know that is happening. So,
given the trajectory that we have today,
the Fed's on pause because we've gotten
to the realm of neutral. And the other
side of the debate, inflation, wages,
growth, all basically say this isn't
been a particularly
restrictive Fed even if they think
they're on the high end. Now they're,
you know, in the neutral end, so they
can wait, and we'll see how the data
evolves. Uh to your point on on QE, he
only gave you half the story in terms of
expanding the balance sheet because the
other part of the balance sheet is
contracting cuz the mortgages run off,
but that technical detail got left off.
I think it was an accidental uh dovish
commentary on the QC. He kind of
dismissed and said, "Hey, everybody
knows this. This is a technical factor."
And the the preamble ahead of the QE
comment was, "Please disregard
everything I'm about to say in terms of
its implications for monetary policy."
Of course nobody did that, and they hear
the Fed's buying Treasuries, and so
there's the knee-jerk response to that
from what we were taught over the the
post-GFC environment. So, it's a little
bit of a misread there.
Uh but it is what it is. It's a little
bit less of a hawkish hold than the
market was expecting.
>> Jeff, 12 minutes ago I was thinking of
Allan Meltzer of your Carnegie Mellon
University. How far are we from a
traditional Fed analysis, whether it's
Meltzer at Carnegie Mellon, Clarida at
uh Columbia, John Taylor out at
Stanford? How far are we away from
conventional theories plural?
Well, I think the key thing that kept
coming back over and over again in this
meeting, and it happened in October, was
the difference in Fed policy today. It
came up around the questions of the
comparisons to the mid-1990s. The
challenge is to Fed monetary policy when
its dual mandate is in is in conflict.
Right? There is no divine coincidence of
monetary policy. There is no environment
that we had over that prior 30-year
period of too little inflation. So,
there is no risk-free path, and that's
really the biggest difference here, and
they're still navigating that. I think
the discussion about how everyone on the
panel on the committee agrees to the
facts, but we disagree on how to deal
with the risks. And that's getting to
the heart of inflation versus growth,
and which way do you do you emphasize? I
I'd add the piece that's missing to this
conversation, however, is that if you're
is financial conditions. And that if
your goals are are conflicting, and
they're and it's sort of a tie, uh then
I think you break the tie with financial
conditions, but they're just not
discussing that at all anymore, which I
I think, you know, could come back to
haunt them. But I I think that's the
piece of the conversation. Mike McKee,
maybe next next press conference, it
would be interesting to ask that
question cuz they used to talk about all
the time. The whole point of the balance
sheet was portfolio rebalance, uh the
impact of the K-shaped recovery. They've
had a lot to do with that in terms of
the wealth effect is supported by the
balance sheet and the Fed's activities.
They absolve themselves of any of that.
I I think there's more there to unpack.
Jeff Rosenberg, indeed, especially as we
see markets climb close to all-time
highs once again. Jeff Rosenberg of
BlackRock, thank you so much, as always,
for being with us. Stephanie, to that
point, right now we're seeing a surge in
in futures equities, excuse me. I'm used
to early shifts, as well as a decline in
bond yields. At what point is this a
liability for the Federal Reserve that
will keep consumption elevated and fuel
any nascent inflationary pressures? I
mean, it's hard to be worried about the
consumer and then concerned that they're
going to consumers going to be too
strong at the same time. I think we're
in an environment where the consumer has
slowed down a lot. So, an easing in
financial conditions isn't necessarily
the worst thing. We're we're worried
about the K-shaped consumer. Of course,
the bottom of the K doesn't necessarily
benefit from a lot of this, but the the
middle of the consumer has also slowed
down. So, if we see a bit of a pick up
on the back of this plus next year,
we're going to get a decent amount of
fiscal stimulus coming around tax
season. That's a reason why we're we're
we're probably going to see a bit of a
pick up in in growth for next year. So,
not necessarily the worst thing just
given we have seen a pretty big
slowdown, but to the extent this
continues to to to to remain for quite
some time, then you might get concerned
on the other side.
>> Just real quick, does this press
conference and this meeting make you
upgrade your inflation forecast longer
term?
I don't
know. Well, at the margin, plus the
combination of, you know, we know we're
going to get a more dovish chair. It's
likely going to be Hassett, in which
case, you know, that sort of adds that
argument. Stephanie Roth, wonderful to
see you, as always. Thank you so much
for being with us here. Stephanie Roth
there. Honestly, this was a fascinating
meeting. This was a honest newsfest. We
just saw the best FOMC day FOMC day when
you look at market performance going
back to March and the most ascents going
back to 2014.
>> Can I use my Peter Fisher hand puppet in
mind here?
>> would. Three months, 30-year bond.
It's getting steeper. It's at 51 basis
points since October 16th, and we're
buttressed right up at new highs on the
broad yield curve is giving us that
steeper, and that always creates a
tension within the economy. Eight basis
point decline in two-year yields just in
this session alone. You're seeing about
a two-year basis point decline at the
long end coming up on the close. Much
more on the Fed with former Boston Fed
President Eric Rosengren, as we see
markets broadly cheer this. What we are
seeing is the Russell 2000 outperforming
almost up 2% on the backs of what was
supposed to be a hawkish cut. Instead,
can we say it? A non-hawkish cut or a
dovish cut? Can we say it that I think
that that's fair.
From Tom Keene and myself from New York
for our TV and radio audience worldwide,
that does it from us. This was the Fed
decides. This is Bloomberg.